"I am proud that a Newhouse graduate was selected student speaker, but Kaitlyn, you sure are a hard act to follow.Thank you, Chancellor Syverud, for your kind words, but I need to correct one thing.A giant I am not.Good about morning, trustees, Deans, members of the faculty, families of the graduates, and an especially good morning to graduates.I grew up in the newspaper business.One of the greats of my newspaper world, the late Salsburger of the New York Times once told me a universal truth which I am happy to share with you today, and I quote, there is no such thing as a too short speech.Happily for you I've taken that dictum to the heart.But this occasion, which I know has special meaning for you, has great meaning for me too.
I arrived at Syracuse as a freshman in 1947.And while I did not achieve what you have, it took me 69 years to get a degree, I am extremely moved to be here alongside you today and if you will indulge me, I'd like to tell you something about good fortune and its opposite, something about love and loss, and what it is taught me.I was not an especially self confident young man.I came to Syracuse largely because my visionary and highly creative brother, sy, my lifelong partner and closest friend came a couple of years before.My father, who started life in a tenement on the Lower East Side of New York, did not emphasize scholarship in quite the same way he might have in a later generation.He was one of those young people, a son of an immigrant from a large struggling family, whose through brilliance and drive, hard work, luck, and a keen eye for opportunity, went from being an apprentice lawyer to a successful publisher of newspapers, from Staten Island to Long Island, Newark, to Syracuse, he began buying newspapers in a pre digital era when newspapers were the core of a community.Both my brother and I were eager to go to work in his fascinating newspaper world.When I arrived at Syracuse, it was the post war years.Like so many University, Syracuse expanded to accommodate thousands of returning veterans.The campus was filled with Quonset huts acting as dormitories and classrooms.In my freshman year I was assigned a bunk in the hay lost in a barn on the grounds of the State Fair, 5 miles from campus.I was a shy teenager and I wasn't exactly proving myself a great scholar.I was also inpatient to begin work in my father's world.Too impatient to make my way to commencement.I left Syracuse after my sophomore year.And so I went to work for a paper on Long Island called the Press.I learned the business side of newspapering, a world that is now as dated as Gutenburg himself, the art of typesetting, the mechanics of the presses, lead plates, acid edged photos, barrels of black ink, tons of news print, every day the production cycle began at 4 AM and that's when I began work.And I loved it!To this day I still can't help but get to the office by 5, just about when you all will be getting home after tonight's celebration, I would guess.My uncle Teddy was my coach, mentor.He taught me the business.He was rock hard and fierce and decisive.Not long after I started working for him, he went on a brief vacation.When he came back he said to me these never to be forgotten words: Donald, I have met this girl and you are going to marry her.I said, yes, Teddy.With that my life changed.Susan Marley was her name, and our first date lasted as long as I could stretch it.From a dinner at a New York restaurant to two nightclubs, I was absolutely taken with her instantly.Susie had a dazzling smile and was charming and alive, intellectual, and boundlessly kind.And she was a Syracuse girl.At evening's end I asked her for another date the next night, but I was broke, and so on a beautiful starry moon bright summer night we rode the Staten Island ferry, which was free.And with my uncle's instructions in mind, and my desires, I asked my Susie to marry me.Susie said, you must be crazy!And she added, I'm 18 and not going to marry until I graduate Wellesley.Not so crazy me, five days after she graduated we were married.Which brings me back to Syracuse University.After my premature exit in 1950.My Susie's parents, Lillian and Harry Marley, were Syracusans who graduated Syracuse University in the 1920s.Harry was president of Syracuse's Board of Education and had close ties with the University.Lillian and Harry's blood ran orange.They turned my dad's and my blood orange.And in Harry's and my dad's spirit, let me here offer my hardy congratulations to the Orange's women's and men's basketball teams and to coaches Q and Jim Boeheim for making it to the final four this year.Syracuse University, as you know, has many great schools, all represented here by you.But you will forgive me if I speak of one that has a special place in my heart.It started with a 20 minute post breakfast meeting at The Hotel Syracuse if many the late 1950s with then Chancellor William Tolley and my dad and me at which an agreement was reached to establish the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications.And it runs through the dedication of Newhouse 1 by Lyndon Johnson at which the President made the historic gulf of Tonken speech, the dedication of Newhouse 2 by CBS William Paley, Newhouse 3 by chief justice John Roberts and the rededication of Newhouse 2 by Oprah, and continues today with my friendship with the school's two great Deans, David Rubin and Lorraine Branham, who deserve full credit for Newhouse being the great school it is today.My marriage so Susie with my marriage to Susie I began a half century that was cloudless and happy in more ways than I can recount.But because life is never cloudless, even for the very lucky, this happy story takes a turn.In 2003 my beautiful Susie was diagnosed with primary progressive aphasia, a dementia, that gradually robbed her of speech and eventually the ability to understand speech.From 2003 to 2010 the downhill slope was gradual but unmistakable.And then in 2010, she became incapable of taking care of herself.When you are fortunate enough to be in love for so long, to enjoy your family and work for so long, there is a feeling of power, of control, I confess to having that feeling, and I lost it.Before her dementia, my Susie and I were as one.As the disease progressed, Susie would change and plateau, change and plateau, and with each change our worlds diverged a little more.I found myself running to catch up with her and this was not a race I could possibly win.My life's focus changed.It had to.I could hardly spend the time I once did on work.What was now required of me was something intensely personal but absolutely essential.I had to make a single minded effort to learn what I needed to know to make my wife's life bearable.That required my immersing myself in the literature about the disease and extensive work with caregivers and professionals.Like so many who face the loss of a loved one to a physical or mental condition, I had so much to learn in order to do right by my Sue at the very moment when she needed me the most.When Sue's disease reached its ultimate stage, when she was no longer able to care for herself or to communicate with the outside world, I came to the conclusion that what she would want me to do was to play some role in finding a treatment for this horrendous dementia.And so with the same determination I once reserved for my life's in the publishing business, I began an illuminating education in what was possible.I did so with the help of a profoundly effective organization, the association for frontal temporal degeneration.They have helped me learn a great deal about Sue's dementia and they have pointed me to a road that hopefully might lead to a treatment for it.From the vantage point of 86 years, I can say with some degree of confidence that many of you sooner or later will face the seemingly unexpected, the mysterious, serious events and moments in time that you hadn't figured into your plans.And when that the time comes, you will have had one advantage that I did not.By finishing your education here, you have a you've had a prolonged experience that exposed you to complex philosophical ideas, to scientific methods, to a sense of history, to views of the human experience that only great writers and artists can provide.That education, of course, is only a start.Your education here and the education that I hope will be a continuing process in your lives is an essential part of the equipment you will need both to contribute as professionals to the greater community and also to help you live your lives, your personal lives, in a thoughtful, productive, and decent way.And finally, I would add a personal wish.I would hope some of you who studied in the fields of humanities and in the sciences, young as you are, will think of careers that touch on the aged, the demented and will work to find treatments for these disease or to find ways of supporting the millions upon millions of families in the United States that have been financially and psychologically devastated by the burdens placed on them by the need to care for their loved ones. Class of 2016, I salute you, I am proud to have received my Syracuse University degree alongside of you, and I wish you great success in your pursuit of happiness. Thank you.

Heartfelt thanks to Chancellor Syverud and the whole Syracuse community, especially our students and their families. You're all 18 minutes away from my shutting up.
When I told my pal Dooney I was getting an honorary doctorate he quipped, being a doctor who can't write prescriptions is like being a general in the Salvation Army.' This made me a few notches less terrified about today.
Which is how poetry works. You start in a scared place and get ziplined somewhere truer.
The real purpose of poetry, W.H. Auden said, is disenchantment. Not to throw fairy dust in somebody's eyes; it's stripping away what's false so you can see what's true underneath. I like to say poetry has to disturb the comfortable and comfort the disturbed.
So I'll start with a Mother's Day poem for all the proud mamas out there, after decades of food prep and butt wiping, it's your day.
I hope ... yeah, let's give ... Go mamas. Magnificent job out there, mamas. And single dads playing mama, you too. And dads.
I remember my own son reaching the age of 16 and driving away in my car, and honest to God, hand to heart, the day he drove away had I seen a giraffe leave our driveway driving my vehicle I would have been more confident that I'd see the giraffe in the vehicle again.
This poem is about that day. It's called Blessing for My 16 Years Son.'
I have this son who assembled inside me during hurricane Gloria. In a flash he appeared. In a tiny blaze.
Outside pines were toppling.
Inside, he was a raw pearl, microscopic, luminous. Look at the muscled obelisk of him now, pawing through the icebox for more grapes. 16 years and not a bone broken, not a single stitch.
By his age I was marked more ways and small.
He's a slouching 6-foot-two with implausible blue eyes which settle on the pages of Emerson's Self Reliance' with profound belligerence. A girl with a navel ring could make his cell phone buzz, or an afroed boy leaning on a mop at Taco Bell. His friends are strange to me as dragons or eels.
Balanced on my kitchen stool, each one gives him his advice.
Antoine claims school is Marshing my mellow.'
Joe longs to date a tattooed girl because he wants a woman willing to do stuff she'll regret.
They come to lead my son into his broadening spiral. Someday soon the tether will snap.
I birthed my own mom into oblivion.
The night my son smashed the car fender and rode home in the rain-streaked cop cruiser he asked, did you and dad screw up this much?'
He let me tuck him in, my grandmother's wedding quilt from 1912 drawn up to his goateed chin. Don't blame us, I said, you're your own idiot now.
At which he grinned.
The cop said the girl in the crimped Chevy took it hard. He found my son awkwardly holding her in the canted headlights, where he draped his own coat over her shaking shoulders. My fault, he confessed right off.
Nice kid said the cop.
Thank you for loaning us all your nice kids.
And kids, thanks for being here. A University is a city of ideas, and we're grateful that you became citizens of our city.
Whether your degree is in architecture or exercise physiology, law or mathematics, by being here you've added something to the conversation this city runs on, the way a body runs on breath.
In the words of a great mathematician, G.H. Hardy, what you've added differs in degree only, and not in kind, from the contributions of all the great artists and all the great thinkers and doers, from Shakespeare to Toni Morrison, Einstein to Carmello.
Each of you is a spark that's added something to our little flame.
And I'm not just talking to the A makers, the valedictorians, salutatorians. I'm addressing the squeakers, the people that showed up today as if sliding into a base, maybe dragging a few incompletes behind you.
Good for you! You made it!
I hope you all learned what you came here for and what you didn't.
If you're lucky, you fell in love here. And if you're really lucky, you had your heart broken.Because that made you a deeper person and maybe forced you to find friends to lean on. Syracuse is now your alma mater, your soul's mother, and mine.
I started out as a squeaker myself.
Yet for 30 years I've taught in college classrooms, and I promise, the harder you were to work with the more you taught me and your fellows about the human heart. Also for 30 years, I've been afraid of not having a Ph.D. Now, the prospect of getting one has turned into the most successful, gut-wrenching weight loss program in history.
That's how fear works though, isn't it? Getting what you want can often scare you more than not getting it.
As a young grad student I worried like hell that I looked like a bimbo. Now that I'm an old maid schoolteacher I worry that I don't.
My point being almost every time I was super afraid it was of the wrong thing. And stuff that first looked like the worst, most humiliating thing that could ever happen almost always led me to something extraordinary and very fine.
So on this day of celebration and hope, I want to do the poet's glum bunny thing of bringing up that deep, soul-destroying fear and suffering that plague every human life. And I want to pass on a few tricks I've learned at such times, for I am an expert in fear.
For the vast majority of my life I had an anxiety disorder big as this stadium. I know I look like a calm, educated white woman. But believe me, I grew up kind of hard.
In a swampy corner of east Texas where the only bookstore sold little day-glo religious figures and there were no books in sight. Of the six drug-dealing friends I moved to California with in my mid-teens, you can't say we ran away, because when you run away they come looking for you.
Of those six friends, four went to the pen, two of those were dead by 20, another HIV positive, another in the witness protection program.
The drugs we all did back then that didn't scare me a bit should have. They looked like the solution. For me they were the problem.
What turned me to drugs I believe is partly a genetic gift from my family. I'm Irish and Native American.
But I also grew up in a chaotic household where everybody was opinionated and because it was Texas, well-armed.
My much-loved oil worker daddy suffered a stroke and lay paralyzed for five years. My mother married seven times. During a psychotic break she once tried to kill me and my sister with a butcher knife. I ran into pedophiles twice as a child.
Mine was not a childhood people wished for.
But I am not a poor thing or Dickensian orphan. I adored my gambler daddy who taught me all the probabilities on a game of craps, and who had in his wallet on the day of his stroke my first published poem.
And my beautiful outlaw mother read books the way junkies shoot dope, plus she got sober at 60 and showed me how to follow.
In a key family anecdote, the guy redoing my mother's kitchen held up a tile with a perfect round hole in the middle and said to my then 70-year-old fluffy-headed mother, wow, Ms. Karr, this looks like a bullet hole.'
And my sister said, isn't that where you shot at daddy?'
And mother didn't miss a beat. She said, so, that's where I shot at Larry. Over there is where I shot at your daddy.'
Which is funny as hell if it's not your mother.
But pretty much every literary project I have taken on in the past 40 years grows directly out of what she and my daddy taught me. So was being their daughter good for me or bad for me?
I wouldn't have had it any other way.
One of the hardest jobs I ever had was trekking crawfish, which I had to do to pay my grad school tuition. Try to imagine the sucking sounds that a 40-pound bag crustacean makes or the smell of them as I sat on the side of the road trying to keep them alive with wet burlap in 100-degree heat.
If I hadn't wanted to study poetry I wouldn't have had to truck crawfish. But poetry has buttered my biscuit. So is it good for me or bad for me?
I practically started my academic career at the lowest point in my life. I checked into a mental institution for what they called suicidal ideation. While I was still in what they call custodial care, I got a fellowship to Radcliffe College. In fact, I had to get a day pass for the first tea, and what scared me that day was that somebody might spy under my sleeve the little plastic wrist bracelet that marked me as a mental patient.
Everybody else was sipping sherry and talking about ideas and I spent the whole day in the corner holding my wrist.
But that stay in the mental Marriott, as I called it, wasn't the end of my life, it was the beginning. It's where I finally heard enough to ask for help. It's where I learned that as deep as a wound is, that's how deep the healing can be. And since this is America, where cash is king, I made enough telling the story of that place to buy a New York apartment and cover my own kid's college tuition.
So was it a nervous breakdown or a nervous breakthrough?
Bad things are going to happen to y'all because they happen to us all, and worrying about them won't stave them off. Look around at each other. This is a good-looking crowd.
I'm telling you, y'all look sharp today!
But at certain times don't make the mistake of comparing your twisted up insides to other people's blow dried outsides. The most privileged person in this Dome suffers the torments of the damned just going about the business of being human.
People they adore have been shot through the heart, they've suffered agonizing infirmities and even the best families, loved ones, however inadvertently, fail to show up at the key moment or they show up serving grief and shame when tenderness is starved for.
As far as I can tell, a dysfunctional family is any family with more than one person in it.
Even at a celebration like this you might feel simmering inside you some low level fear about not getting the right job or apartment or roommate or partner, and your parents are scared too that you'll land back on that couch.
When I was young and troubled, I thought feeling better would only happen when I found enough people to love me, but it turns out finding people to love and do for is way more healing.
And that's what Syracuse has given me. The opposite of love isn't hate. It isn't even indifference. It's fear.
Often fear of the very pain and suffering that we all know is inevitable. Every major religion tells you the solution to your fear is loving other people and they're not wrong, but they don't talk that much about how truly nervewracking everybody is.
The people sucking up your subway air or getting your job or stealing your boyfriend or just standing ahead of you in Starbucks?he fear and rage and resentment you feel for them or even for yourself can choke your heart.
Fear can take that expensively educated brain of yours and reduce it to the state of a dog crouched over a bone. You know the moments, heart pounding in your ears, sweat bumping down your ribs. Ask yourself at those times, who's noticing how scared you are.
To me it's this watcher, or noticer self, that's who I think you really are. That's where your soul is. That's where God comes in. That's a place you can draw strength from.
And if I could, I would download into all your brains today a hard-wired app that would permit you to observe your own rage and fear from inside that quiet, noticer place, to install a button you could push during the bad times and have somebody say in a really convincing voice, this might be the start of something great that I just can't foresee right now because I am scared shitless.
And if you can get curious about what scares or infuriates you, especially if it's part of yourself, you can get way less scared.
I'd like to end with a story about the professor who inspired me to want to teach college. His name was Walt Mink, yes, they named a punk band after him. I got to know Walt because in the physiological psych class he taught I was paired with the most irritating lab partner in history.
Macalester College that year was awash in tie dye and long hair. This guy only wanted to talk about the superiority of white people over African Americans and Jews.
He had allergies, not the best hygiene. He smelled like a foot. And he wiped snot on a lot of stuff I had to pick up.
At one point I went to Walt, who I was sort of shy to talk to because I was an idiot. So at one point I go to my professor and I said, why don't you just tell him to shut up?'
And Walt said a sentence I'll never forget because it has informed my life as a professor: because it's my job to put information into his head and unless I know what's already in there, I can't do my job.'
He had shown me how to replace revulsion with curiosity. To wonder. Because of that kid I wound up in Walt's office a lot. And because I was depressed I eventually broke down crying, and he and his wife helped me get into therapy and they gave me all these easy jobs so I could pay for it, like taking care of the department's lab rats and babysitting their high school-aged kids who didn't need it.
So was that lab partner good for me or bad for me?
Also, Walt took me to lunch all the time, which then seemed like an incredible luxury to be able to eat in a restaurant. And before I left Minnesota I said to him, how will I ever pay you back for all this?
And he looked surprised. He said, it's not that linear. You're not going to pay me back, you're going to go out there and take somebody else to lunch.'
Now, the idea that Walt thought, looking at me at 19 years old, that I would ever make enough money to buy somebody else lunch, astonished me.
It is truly the greatest vote of confidence I'd ever received. Walt showed me that a talent for fear could also mask a talent for empathy.
For caring about what other people thought.
I hope you remember what Walt says when the world scares you with its barks and bites. May you leave us more curious and more openhearted about your fellow citizens than when you showed up.
Being smart and rich are lucky. But being curious and compassionate will save your ass.
Being curious and compassionate will take you out of your ego and edge your soul towards wonder, a word I inadvertently stole from Chancellor Syverud today.
Now ya'll go out there and buy somebody broker than you lunch.
Thank you."

Good morning and happy Mother's Day! Let's hear it for the mothers.
I'd like to begin with an announcement: To the Chancellor, to the trustees, to the faculty, to the parents and grandparents who are smiling so hard their faces are starting to ache. To the siblings texting descriptions of their mad impatience up in the bleachers, to all of you my announcement is this: I hereby declare the Class of 2014 to be, without question, the greatest graduating class in the history of Syracuse University.
The most intelligent. The most accomplished. And certainly, the best looking. (Yes, I thought you would agree). By the way, I think you graduates are off the hook for Mother's Day. The vision of you in a cap and gown, trust me, beats a nice ‘Best mom ever' mug any old day. The mothers agree.
At least for one day your parents feel, and I've felt it, an immeasurable sense of relief. First of all, they know where you are. And second, no kidding, their hearts are absolutely overflowing with joy.
So good, I've now officially fulfilled the most important initial requirement of a proper commencement speech, pandering shamelessly to the graduating class and to motherhood and mothers everywhere. I hope you appreciate it because this is a pretty scary gig.
This place is known as the Loud House. I have no idea why. And it's been the scene of many Orange triumphs.
As most of you know, Syracuse has been the scene of two of the most celebrated speeches delivered anywhere in recent years, speeches by two gifted writers, Aaron Sorkin and George Saunders. Not only were Aaron and George particularly eloquent, they're also Syracuse people. Family. Which leads to the absolutely sensible question: What in God's name is this outsider doing here?
I can't know for sure, but I doubt it's because, as the editor of The New Yorker, I'm the world's foremost judge of talking dog cartoons. By the way, I am.
And I'm pretty certain that I'm the only person alive whose job in large measure is based on an ability to distinguish a funny talking spaniel from a really boring talking spaniel.
There are jobs and there are jobs. But I think it's something else.
I think part of the reason I'm here has something to do with the family for whom I work. The Syracuse family that runs the New Yorker and much else. The Newhouse family. Even on winter days with your eyes tearing from the cold, you must have noticed the buildings on campus, the Newhouse School of Public Communications, cue the cheering of the communications school. The Newhouse family is a press family that is press shy. But let me thank them just this once publicly, not only for the gifts they've provided to your great institution, but for the gift of absolute editorial freedom that they have provided to my colleagues and to me.
Now, the remaining obligation of a Commencement address is to have, well, something to say. And this is what I would say three decades after I threw my own absolutely ridiculous graduation hat up into the air. And by the way, there's some great ones out there.
I have every hope for all of you as individuals. I hope for your good health. I hope that you are blessed with family and friends to love. I hope you're able to care for your parents, and for your children. I hope you find a way to make a living that thrills and nourishes you. I hope, in other words, that your lives are happy and deep and interesting and loving lives.
But I also hope you know, as of today you are inescapably citizens of the world.
Last year at convocation George Saunders spoke of the virtue of kindness. And he spoke of kindness for the most part as a private virtue, a texture of human interaction, a way of being, really between and among friends, family, colleagues and even strangers. And he was absolutely right. To be kind—to be the opposite of heedless or cruel—is a simple-sounding but wholly essential virtue.
But all of us are also members of a community, many kinds of communities that stretch from the local to the global. And this demands of you many things. Being a member of a community demands that you pay taxes, obey the law, maybe join a school board, volunteer to help the poor and disabled. But the one demand of living in a community and in the world that I want to talk about today is the demand placed on you for vision.
It's traditional on graduation day for your elders to admit, as if it were ever a secret to you, that we, the old and the soon-to-be-so have screwed up the world on a colossal scale. We then go on to say we're very sorry but now we're going fishing and now we're depending on you to fix everything. Have a ball!
In fact, that's a dodge, a dumbshow of civilizational false modesty. In so many ways modern life is immensely better than ever before. Over time, we human beasts, or at least the large and lucky percentage of us, have emerged from the state of nature that was, in the words of Thomas Hobbs, ‘solitary or nasty, brutish and short.' And through the development of law and political organizations, science and culture, our lives are less solitary, less poor, less nasty, brutish and short. Not for a second do I want to suggest that life is better for everyone. We have not eliminated cruelty, stupidity, poverty or violence. Oppression reigns from Damascus to Pyongyang to even Moscow, but the movement forward, while full of detours and disasters, the stuff we call history, is unmistakable.
Think of it—the percentage of the world's population destined to live in a state of absolute poverty has in just the past 50 years dropped by half. The percentage of the world that lives in some form of relative political liberty has vastly expanded, from Eastern Europe to Latin America. And although a modern media guarantees we are at least dimly aware of bloody conflict from Ukraine to the Central African Republic, the scale of the world's conflicts, according to scholars like Stephen Pinker, is, overall, markedly less than any time in human history.
And we are healthier. My colleague at the New Yorker, Atul Gawande, has written about a typical medical operation in the 19th century performed by a surgeon named Liston. Because there was no effective anesthesia at the time, Liston had to work at fantastic speed. But while trying to amputate a patient's leg, he also managed to amputate the fingers of his assistant. Whoops. Both the patient and the assistant died of subsequent infections. The sight of all this medical mayhem was so disgusting that a spectator in the operating theater died of shock. Thereby, as Gawande writes, this was a surgical procedure with a 300 percent mortality rate. A big body count. And not at all unusual for the times.
So we've gotten better at these things. So much of what used to kill us is now a matter of an antibiotic or a pill. Operations on the heart, the brain, can often be performed without blood at all.
As Gawande writes, we are now in an era in which a teenage boy can undergo aorta surgery on a Thursday and be well enough to sprain his ankle playing sports the following Saturday. The technological refinement of our abilities to care for the human body has been nothing short of miraculous. At the height of the Roman Empire, life expectancy was about as old as you are now, 22. By 1900, no so long ago, global life expectancy was 32. Now it's close to 70 and in the United States we live into our 80s and some of you, God help you, will limp past 100.
As for technological advance, I hardly need to tell you: The capacity to communicate efficiently and instantly, to compute, to navigate, to take 5,000 graduation pictures as you will today, to record a voice, to read the news in any language and then share it, to access the literary and musical wealth of all of human history, to do all of these things, is as simple as reaching into your pocket.
You have a remote control for your life waiting for you.
We have also, locally and globally, made advances in the quality and range of human empathy. Take the life of the great Lou Reed, who studied here at Syracuse. He was not some distant historical figure. He and his band The Velvet underground were pivotal figures in rock ‘n roll in the New York art scene, and he died just last October. And yet when he was a teenager in the late '50s, his parents tried to, quote, solve, unquote, his bisexuality by submitting him to electric shock therapy. Try to imagine that. Many years later he said about the treatment, "They put electrodes on your head and the effect is that you lose your memory and become a vegetable. You can't read a book because you get to page 17 and you have to start right back on Page 1 again."
It was around the same time that American magazines advertised a hideous burning cream that could lighten the skin so that African Americans could somehow pass more easily into white racist society. Now we live in a world where the gains of the Civil Rights Movement of the '50s and '60s and the women's movement of the '70s at least seem to be well established. And we're deep into a liberation movement of the 21st century, the LGBT movement. Marriage freedom, unthinkable so recently, opposed by absolutely everyone but a small number, is now, I'm happy to say, a national inevitability. In 50 years, in other words, we have gone from putting electrodes on the head of a teenager to, quote, cure his homosexual feelings, to a growing national consensus that celebrates the marriages, the equality, and the humanity of gay men and lesbians. Hallelujah.
And yet, if the world is on such upward trajectories, aren't you just free to pursue your own private lives and tend your private gardens? Needless to say, my triumphalist description of global advance is full of holes and gigantic, horrifying exceptions. If you think racism in America is disappeared, you know nothing of Trayvon Martin. If you think racism in America is disappeared, you haven't tried to drive or hail a cab while black or brown. If you think sexism is dead in America, you haven't taken note of the unbearable maleness of corporate boardrooms in New York or Silicon Valley. If you think sexism in America is dead you haven't noticed that women are still paid markedly less than men for comparable work. If you think homophobia is dead, you are not watching the last round of Republican primary debates when a gay combat soldier in Afghanistan asked the candidates about his rights in the military and members of the crowd booed him and the candidates, cowards one and all, failed to stand up for him.
But all of that is self evident. I said I wanted to speak of the demands on you of vision. What I mean is that the rate and the way the world advances is dependent on us and now most definitely as of this day on you. Nothing is inevitable. If this day means anything, it means that you are now in the contingent of the responsible. You must be kind, yes, but you must also look beyond your own house. We're depending on you for your efforts and your vision. We are depending on your eye and your imagination to identify what wrongs exist and persist, and on your hands, your backs, your efforts to right them.
All of us have 2020 vision when it comes to the outrages of the past. As my friend the philosopher Anthony Appiah reminds us, "Once pretty much everywhere beating your wife and children was regarded as a father's duty. Homosexuality was a hanging offense. Waterboarding was approved, in fact invented, by the Catholic Church. Through the middle of the 19th century the United States and other nations in the Americas condoned plantation slavery. Many of our grandparents were born in the states where women were forbidden to vote. And well into the 20th century lynch mobs in this country tortured, hanged and burned human beings at picnics. We look back on all this now with a self satisfied notion that we are beyond such cruelties. We are so far beyond them that we cannot imagine a moral sensibility that condoned and defended them. Because after all, we are so advanced, we are so good.
But we are not so good. We are humans, and, as such, we are, without our quite knowing it, always living at least partly in the dark. What conditions do we tolerate now that require our, your, visionary capacity and effort? What will we look back on with incredulous shame and how will we begin to right it?
What gnaws at you? And what will you do about it?
Is it the way we treat and warehouse our elderly as our population grows older? Is it the way we isolate and underserve the physically and mentally disabled? Is it our absurd American fascination with guns and our insistence on valuing the so called rights of ownership over the clear and present danger of gun violence? What will we—what will you—do about the widening divides of class and opportunity in this country? You are, dear friends, about to enter an economy that is increasingly winner take all. Part of this is the result of globalization. But do we just throw up our hands and say that's the way it is? And what about our refusal to look squarely at the degradation of the planet we inhabit? In the last election cycle many candidates refused even to acknowledge the hard science, irrefutable science, of climate change. The president, while readily accepting the facts, has done far too little to alter them. How long are we, are you, prepared to wait?
No one is insisting you all become global politicians or selfless activists. Some of you will spend nearly all of your time pursuing private, professional, and personal comforts and rewards. But that does not rule out your spending at least some significant time in the service of all. Of all of us. Of seeing the world clear and taking part, in some way large or small, in making it better.
This is what comes with citizenship. This is what comes with a diploma. So while we all congratulate you today on in effect joining the world, we also ask that you help us see that world anew. See it more clearly. And then act. So that a generation from now, when I'm gone and you're sitting at your own child's graduation, maybe here at Syracuse on Mother's Day, why not, you will know you've done your part for your son, for your daughter, and for everyone in this loud house and well beyond.
Thank you and congratulations!

Congratulations to Chancellor Cantor, the members of the Board of Trustees, faculty, parents, guests, and most important of all, members of the Class of 2013!
Now, I hope that you students now appreciate that ancient wisdom "the tassel is worth the hassle." It sounds a little better in Latin, but you get the idea. And a special congratulations to all you moms out there, Happy Mother's Day!
It's a pretty awesome way to celebrate, isn't it, to watch your little baby get that great big degree? Pretty awesome.
And to you graduates, just a little tip, this is coming from a dad, but your parents are so, so proud of you today and if you've learned anything at all in University you know that means that this is the optimal moment to ask for a loan. Go for it!
I'm especially happy to be celebrating with you in Syracuse for a couple of reasons. One is that my late colleague, William Safire, of the New York Times, was just a devoted Syracuse man. Even in our black and white pages, as Jaime would say, he proudly bled orange, and this year what with Syracuse's success in basketball and lacrosse, Bill would be completely insufferable. I'm just a little bit jealous. Nevermind.
But the other reason is that what SU is doing, what all of you are doing along with Nancy Cantor through Scholarship in Action really is something truly important in terms of reaffirming the University as a public good.
And I promise not to bore you with a discussion of public good, you can put away your economics textbooks, but that idea of a public good is something that is so central to our history, to our identity, everything from public schools to national parks, like Yellowstone, Sesame Street, cancer research, and yet we as a country have, I'm afraid, been inching away a little bit from that vision of the public good as a unifying force.
Partly that is as America has become more polarized as a nation, politically and economically.
Today the top 1% have a greater collective net worth than the bottom 90%. And in this period we have seen American schools go from number one in the world to, according to one recent study, number 17. Universities are maybe the most important public good we have, and I really do thank Syracuse University for leading that effort to emphasize that point, and for democratizing tertiary education as a whole.
But granted, look, it's a tough time to graduate given the job market these days, we know that.
There is a story, maybe apocryphal, of a commencement at another University. A couple of graduates still in their cap and gown went out of graduation ceremony, jumped into a taxi and the taxi driver looked back at them and the saw them in their regalia and said oh, congratulations, and they beamed and said, "Class of 2013!"
And the taxi driver beamed back and said, "Class of 2003."
In journalism we call those kind of stories "too good to check."
Well, in a larger perspective though, whatever the challenges of this job market, the truth is that, frankly, we're so damn lucky to be in this time and place and enjoying this public good of a University education. Let me tell you about a friend of mine, a Zimbabwean woman named Tererai Trent. She grew up in rural Zimbabwe. She was not allowed to go to school because she was a girl. So she herded the family cattle in the fields. But Tererai was truly brilliant and so she learned on her own, she learned math and reading by doing her brother's homework.
And actually after a few years of this he got in trouble because the teacher didn't understand how her brother, who was mediocre in class, kept turning in this brilliant homework, so he beat the brother until he confessed it was his supposedly illiterate sister who had been doing his homework.
That could have been an opportunity for her, but instead everybody just got mad at Tererai. So Tererai was married off at the age of 11. Married off at the age of 11 to a man who beat her and was jealous of her intelligence. But Tererai is also a reminder of the human capacity for resilience. And I hope that when you find your own dreams blocked that you will think of her and how she pursued her goals.
What she did was she wrote down three goals on a piece of paper, the first goal was that she would go to the United States to study. The second goal was that she would earn a B.A. and a master's and the third goal was that she would earn a Ph.D.
These are completely absurd goals for a married girl who has had no formal education and who is a cattle herder in rural Zimbabwe.
But she took that piece of paper with those three goals, put it inside a piece of plastic, put that inside an old tin can and buried it in a field under a rock near where she was herding her cattle. Then she began to study on her own and took correspondence courses and did brilliantly. And after some years of this she was accepted to Oklahoma State University.
She then dug up that tin can, took out that piece of paper and checked off goal number one. She then earned her B.A. and master's. She went back to Zimbabwe, dug up that tin can and pulled out that piece of paper and checked off goal number two.
Finally, just a couple of years ago, she earned her doctorate.
She went back to Zimbabwe, went back to that old field where she used to herd cattle, found the stone, dug up the tin can, pulled out the piece of paper and checked off goal number three. And now she's used her education to set up a school in the village because she feels lucky and wants to give back that opportunity that she had. Her school is going to open this fall.
Well, let's all give Tererai a hand, actually. She deserves it! I called her and told her I was going to tell her story here and she was very proud and I will relay your enthusiasm to her as well. An amazing woman.
And people like Tererai, I think, remind us of a basic truth in the world, which is that talent is universal, but opportunity is not.
Talent is universal and opportunity is not.
And I hope that you can use your education to help chip away at that challenge, that the truth. The truth is that we have all benefited from opportunities that others extended to us and many of you are receiving degrees in part because you had the chance to receive financial aid. Now, in the coming years as you—as you pay down those debts too—I hope that you will have the chance to pay that forward as well.
Now, I'm not saying that you should all enlist as aid workers. You don't all need to become Mother Theresa. But I do hope that you will find some space in your life, some space for engaging in a cause that is larger than yourselves.
And just keep your mind open for those opportunities where you can make that kind of a difference. Think of the Cleveland story that has riveted us for the last couple of week, the three young women kidnapped and locked up inside a house for ten years. Now, when Amanda Berry's hand snaked through that front door and she began screaming for help, there were a couple of men in the street.
Now, I think it would have been very easy for them at that point to think oh, there is some crazy woman, maybe involved in some domestic dispute. I think plenty of people would have moved on rather than get involved in somebody else's mess. And I think all of us would have felt a little uncomfortable about trespassing on somebody's private property to go up on that front porch and ask what was going wrong.
And those two men, of course, did just that, and then they also took it upon themselves to break down that front door to let her out. And everything changed.
For most of us, the chance to intervene is not going to be that dramatic. But you too are going to encounter needs and pleas and you'll frankly have the same sense of uncertainty about what the right thing to do will be. You'll be busy. You're going to have plenty of demands on your time and on your wallet. And you can't help everybody.
But one thing I have learned is that it is possible to change other people's life trajectories almost in your spare time, almost as dramatically as those rescuers did in Cleveland. Maybe it's through mentoring a kid, maybe it's through after school tutoring or helping a kid figure out college options. Or maybe it's through paying a girl's textbook fee so she can attend a school like Tererai's in Zimbabwe.
But the point is that every now and then I hope you'll use your education to go toward those pleas for help and climb on those porches and break down those doors. And I'm hoping that for your own sake too because, and this is going to sound trite, but I think it really is a road to personal fulfillment.
Now, think about what we want in life.
A major component is happiness. And we sometimes think oh, if we can just win that Powerball lottery, you know, boy, we'll be set forever. We'll be sitting on a beach in the Caribbean, sipping pina coladas.
But that connection between money and happiness is actually somewhat tenuous, and that's partly because wealth is on the one hand empowering, but it can also be isolating. In one University of Minnesota study, research subjects were primed by being exposed to a screen saver that showed dollar bills floating around on the computer screen. And those people who were exposed to that screen as opposed to one of fish swimming on a screen saver, those exposed to the money were more likely to choose to work alone, to choose solitary recreational pursuits and when somebody else came in the room to sit farther apart from that person.
Something similar happened to a fellow named Jack Whittaker, who I don't know if the name rings a bell, but back in 2002 he won a $315 million Powerball lottery jackpot. At that time it was the biggest jackpot payout ever to a single individual. He was a business owner in his 50s and he said that his only aim was to use that money to make his wife happy, his daughter happy, and his granddaughter happy.
His granddaughter especially was the light of his life. He gave generously to his church, he set up a foundation, he seemed very well grounded. Then after about six months everything just seemed to go wrong. He began to patronize strip clubs. He began to drink too heavily. He ended up divorcing his wife and getting involved in litigation with her and involved in several hundred other lawsuits. His daughter died, cause of death was not fully established, possibly a drug overdose. And then the hardest blow of all, his beloved granddaughter died of a drug overdose as well.
And at that point she was just 17 years old.
And at that point Jack Whittaker told reporters in tears that he just wished he had torn up that lottery ticket when he had the chance. Now, I guess the lesson is to be careful what we wish for.
I certainly wouldn't want to argue that money can't buy happiness, and it's equally true that poverty can't buy happiness either. But I think the connections are more complicated than we sometimes assume, and in fact, there is pretty good evidence emerging about a more dependable way to raise one's happiness level. And that is to engage with others collectively in a cause that is larger than yourself. Think of it as the selfishness of altruism.
Now, one study in Massachusetts found that this kind of generosity, this kind of social engagement correlated more strongly with longevity than low cholesterol levels. So there's a real physical dimension of this as well. So if you're worried about your heart, then, well, take your statins, but also maybe think about reaching for the checkbook, volunteering, climb onto those porches when you see those outstretched hands, and help break down doors.
Now, in a larger sense I think that all of us can in some measure become a public good. Yup, little old you, in some sense can become like Yellowstone, like Sesame Street or like SU, a public good serving the public providing a broad public benefit.
Let me leave you with a story of a friend of mine, a young American woman who not much older than those of you who are graduate students here. I met her when she was working in Darfur, she saw cruelties that no human being should ever have to see. But she was unbelievably strong. She never showed fear, she never showed weakness. And then she was back in the U.S. over Christmas vacation, she was in her grandmother's backyard and she totally lost it. She was just weeping uncontrollably.
And you know what it was?
Her grandmother had set up a bird feeder in the backyard. And my friend was sitting there reflecting on all that she had seen in Darfur, thinking particularly about a family, about two sisters who had been seized by the militia and turned into sex slaves, and their father had gone and begged on his knees, begged the militia commander to "let my daughters go." And the commander had then called everybody in front of him, including the two girls, and then had beheaded their father in front of them.
And my friend was thinking about this and then her eyes fell on that bird feeder. That's when she lost it, because she had suddenly thought how incredibly lucky she was to be—to have grown up in a country where we largely take security for granted. And where even in an economic downturn we can pretty much count on having enough food and clothing and housing to get by, and even have a little left over to help wild birds get through the winter.
She thought about the responsibilities that come with that good fortune. In the same way, the fact that we are all here right now, truly means we have won the lottery of life. And when you have won the lottery of life, I think the question becomes how do you discharge the responsibility that comes with it?
So the fact that we were all born in the right place at the right time, the implication is that we have some responsibility to pay it forward.
My advice is to find some issue that resonates with you, that you care about, and then work to get engaged in it. If only in your spare time. It may sound sanctimonious and earnest, but I think you will see it's also self-interested. There are plenty of selfish pleasures in the world, but maybe the most selfish of all is altruism. The blunt truth is that all our efforts to help other people have a pretty mixed record of success. But they have this almost perfect record of helping ourselves.
So congratulations, graduates on this Mother's Day.
Go out and change the world just a little bit. And as you bleed orange go one step further and become bleeding hearts, orange bleeding hearts, and go and be like Syracuse University itself, a public good! Congratulations!

Thank you very much. Madam Chancellor, members of the Board of Trustees, members of the faculty and administration, parents and friends, honored guests and graduates, thank you for inviting me to speak today at this magnificent Commencement ceremony.
There's a story about a man and a woman who have been married for 40 years. One evening at dinner the woman turns to her husband and says, "You know, 40 years ago on our wedding day you told me that you loved me and you haven't said those words since." They sit in silence for a long moment before the husband says "If I change my mind, I'll let you know."
Well, it's been a long time since I sat where you sit, and I can remember looking up at my teachers with great admiration, with fondness, with gratitude and with love. Some of the teachers who were there that day are here this day and I wanted to let them know that I haven't changed my mind.
There's another story. Two newborn babies are lying side by side in the hospital and they glance at each other. Ninety years later, through a remarkable coincidence, the two are back in the same hospital lying side by side in the same hospital room. They look at each other and one of them says, "So what'd you think?" 
It's going to be a very long time before you have to answer that question, but time shifts gears right now and starts to gain speed. Just ask your parents whose heads, I promise you, are exploding right now. They think they took you home from the maternity ward last month. They think you learned how to walk last week. They don't understand how you could possibly be getting a degree in something today. They listened to "Cats in the Cradle" the whole car ride here.
I'd like to say to the parents that I realized something while I was writing this speech: the last teacher your kids will have in college will be me. And that thought scared the hell out of me. Frankly, you should feel exactly the same way. But I am the father of an 11-year-old daughter, so I do know how proud you are today, how proud your daughters and your sons make you every day, and that they did just learn how to walk last week, that you'll never not be there for them, that you love them more than they'll ever know and that it doesn't matter how many degrees get put in their hand, they will always be dumber than you are.
And make no mistake about it, you are dumb. You're a group of incredibly well-educated dumb people. I was there. We all were there. You're barely functional. There are some screw-ups headed your way. I wish I could tell you that there was a trick to avoiding the screw-ups, but the screw-ups, they're a-coming for ya. It's a combination of life being unpredictable, and you being super dumb.
Today is May 13th and today you graduate. Growing up, I looked at my future as a timeline of graduations in which every few years, I'd be given more freedom and reward as I passed each milestone of childhood. When I get my driver's license, my life will be like this; when I'm a senior, my life will be like that; when I go off to college, my life will be like this; when I move out of the dorms, my life will be like that; and then finally, graduation. And on graduation day, I had only one goal left, and that was to be part of professional theater. We have this in common, you and I謡e want to be able to earn a living doing what we love. Whether you're a writer, mathematician, engineer, architect, butcher, baker or candlestick maker, you want an invitation to the show.
Today is May 13th, and today you graduate, and today you already know what I know: to get where you're going, you have to be good, and to be good where you're going, you have to be damned good. Every once in a while, you'll succeed. Most of the time you'll fail, and most of the time the circumstances will be well beyond your control. 
When we were casting my first movie, "A Few Good Men," we saw an actor just 10 months removed from the theater training program at UCLA. We liked him very much and we cast him in a small, but featured role as an endearingly dimwitted Marine corporal. The actor had been working as a Domino's Pizza delivery boy for 10 months, so the news that he'd just landed his first professional job and that it was in a new movie that Rob Reiner was directing, starring Tom Cruise and Jack Nicholson, was met with happiness. But as is often the case in show business, success begets success before you've even done anything, and a week later the actor's agent called. The actor had been offered the lead role in a new, as-yet-untitled Milos Forman film. He was beside himself. He felt loyalty to the first offer, but Forman after all was offering him the lead. We said we understood, no problem, good luck, we'll go with our second choice. Which, we did. And two weeks later, the Milos Forman film was scrapped. Our second choice, who was also making his professional debut, was an actor named Noah Wyle. Noah would go on to become one of the stars of the television series "ER" and hasn't stopped working since. I don't know what the first actor is doing, and I can't remember his name. Sometimes, just when you think you have the ball safely in the end zone, you're back to delivering pizzas for Domino's. Welcome to the NFL.
In the summer of 1983, after I graduated, I moved to New York to begin my life as a struggling writer. I got a series of survival jobs that included bartending, ticket-taking, telemarketing, limo driving, and dressing up as a moose to pass out leaflets in a mall. I ran into a woman who'd been a senior here when I was a freshman. I asked her how it was going and how she felt Syracuse had prepared her for the early stages of her career. She said, "Well, the thing is, after three years you start to forget everything they taught you in college. But once you've done that, you'll be fine." I laughed because I thought it was funny and also because I wanted to ask her out, but I also think she was wrong.
As a freshman drama student nd this story is now becoming famous had a play analysis classt was part of my requirement. The professor was Gerardine Clark. (applause) If anybody was wondering, the drama students are sitting over there (applause). The play analysis class met for 90 minutes twice a week. We read two plays a week and we took a 20-question true or false quiz at the beginning of the session that tested little more than whether or not we'd read the play. The problem was that the class was at 8:30 in the morning, it met all the way down on East Genesee, I lived all the way up at Brewster/Boland, and I don't know if you've noticed, but from time to time the city of Syracuse experiences inclement weather. All this going to class and reading and walking through snow, wind chill that's apparently powered by jet engines, was having a negative effect on my social life in general and my sleeping in particular. At one point, being quizzed on "Death of a Salesman," a play I had not read, I gave an answer that indicated that I wasn't aware that at the end of the play the salesman dies. And I failed the class. I had to repeat it my sophomore year; it was depressing, frustrating and deeply embarrassing. And it was without a doubt the single most significant event that occurred in my evolution as a writer. I showed up my sophomore year and I went to class, and I paid attention, and we read plays and I paid attention, and we discussed structure and tempo and intention and obstacle, possible improbabilities, improbable impossibilities, and I paid attention, and by God when I got my grades at the end of the year, I'd turned that F into a D. I'm joking: it was pass/fail.
But I stood at the back of the Eisenhower Theater at the Kennedy Center in Washington watching a pre-Broadway tryout of my plays, knowing that when the curtain came down, I could go back to my hotel room and fix the problem in the second act with the tools that Gerry Clark gave me. Eight years ago, I was introduced to Arthur Miller at a Dramatists Guild function and we spent a good part of the evening talking. A few weeks later when he came down with the flu he called and asked if I could fill in for him as a guest lecturer at NYU. The subject was "Death of a Salesman." You made a good decision coming to school here. 
I've made some bad decisions. I lost a decade of my life to cocaine addiction. You know how I got addicted to cocaine? I tried it. The problem with drugs is that they work, right up until the moment that they decimate your life. Try cocaine, and you'll become addicted to it. Become addicted to cocaine, and you will either be dead, or you will wish you were dead, but it will only be one or the other. My big fear was that I wasn't going to be able to write without it. There was no way I was going to be able to write without it. Last year I celebrated my 11-year anniversary of not using coke. (applause) Thank you. In that 11 years, I've written three television series, three movies, a Broadway play, won the Academy Award and taught my daughter all the lyrics to "Pirates of Penzance." I have good friends. 
You'll meet a lot of people who, to put it simply, don't know what they're talking about. In 1970 a CBS executive famously said that there were four things that we would never, ever see on television: a divorced person, a Jewish person, a person living in New York City and a man with a moustache. By 1980, every show on television was about a divorced Jew who lives in New York City and goes on a blind date with Tom Selleck.
Develop your own compass, and trust it. Take risks, dare to fail, remember the first person through the wall always gets hurt. My junior and senior years at Syracuse, I shared a five-bedroom apartment at the top of East Adams with four roommates, one of whom was a fellow theater major named Chris. Chris was a sweet guy with a sly sense of humor and a sunny stage presence. He was born out of his time, and would have felt most at home playing Mickey Rooney's sidekick in "Babes on Broadway." I had subscriptions back then to Time and Newsweek. Chris used to enjoy making fun of what he felt was an odd interest in world events that had nothing to do with the arts. I lost touch with Chris after we graduated and so I'm not quite certain when he died. But I remember about a year and a half after the last time I saw him, I read an article in Newsweek about a virus that was burning its way across the country. The Centers for Disease Control was calling it "Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome" or AIDS for short. And they were asking the White House for $35 million for research, care and cure. The White House felt that $35 million was way too much money to spend on a disease that was only affecting homosexuals, and they passed. Which I'm sure they wouldn't have done if they'd known that $35 million was a steal compared to the $2 billion it would cost only 10 years later.
Am I saying that Chris would be alive today if only he'd read Newsweek? Of course not. But it seems to me that more and more we've come to expect less and less of each other, and that's got to change. Your friends, your family, this school expect more of you than vocational success. 
Today is May 13th and today you graduate and the rules are about to change, and one of them is this: Decisions are made by those who show up. Don't ever forget that you're a citizen of this world.
Don't ever forget that you're a citizen of this world, and there are things you can do to lift the human spirit, things that are easy, things that are free, things that you can do every day. Civility, respect, kindness, character. You're too good for schadenfreude, you're too good for gossip and snark, you're too good for intolerance nd since you're walking into the middle of a presidential election, it's worth mentioning that you're too good to think people who disagree with you are your enemy. Unless they went to Georgetown, in which case, they can go to hell. (Laughter)
Don't ever forget that a small group of thoughtful people can change the world. It's the only thing that ever has.
Rehearsal's over. You're going out there now, you're going to do this thing. How you live matters. You're going to fall down, but the world doesn't care how many times you fall down, as long as it's one fewer than the number of times you get back up.
For the class of 2012, I wish you joy. I wish you health and happiness and success, I wish you a roof, four walls, a floor and someone in your life that you care about more than you care about yourself. Someone who makes you start saying "we" where before you used to say "I" and "us" where you used to say "me." I wish you the quality of friends I have and the quality of colleagues I work with. Baseball players say they don't have to look to see if they hit a home run, they can feel it. So I wish for you a moment moment soon hen you really put the bat on the ball, when you really get a hold of one and drive it into the upper deck, when you feel it. When you aim high and hit your target, when just for a moment all else disappears, and you soar with wings as eagles. The moment will end as quickly as it came, and so you'll have to have it back, and so you'll get it back no matter what the obstacles. A lofty prediction, to be sure, but I flat out guarantee it.
Today is May 13th, and today you graduate, and my friends, you ain't seen nothin' yet. Thank you, and congratulations.

Thank you, Chancellor Cantor, for a very warm introduction. I wish you'd told me that I was going to be following the mascot.
Chancellor Cantor, trustees, faculty, students: thank you for allowing me to come here to address you for your 157th commencement. I was honored to accept this invitation and to receive an honorary doctor of science, and I'd like to congratulate my fellow honorary degree awardees, particular Nick Donofrio, who I got to know when he was at IBM during our era to sequence the human genome.
Obviously most, I would like to congratulate you—the students— and your families. I know what an important day this is for all of you, not only from having gone through it myself years ago, but also as a father, with my son, Chris, graduating in June from UC-Santa Cruz. 
I remember well the feeling of pride that I had first getting my B.A. and then my Ph.D. after barely graduating from high school, and then five years later starting my education over after being in the Vietnam War. I know how your parents feel, from the pride I have in my own son, who started his education over after working for years doing metal sculpture. I applaud you and your families for your efforts and accomplishments for being here today. 
Let me first start by saying that for those of you who don't know me, I'm obviously not Snoop Dogg, Bob Saget, or Martha Stewart, that some of you indicated would be more appropriate as a Commencement speaker than I would be. Now reading about this made me laugh, especially the part that I wasn't controversial enough, because I've been hearing for 15 years about how controversial I was. So it was a relief to see the change. The New York Times wrote a few years back that if I wasn't careful with all my discoveries, I would become the establishment. I hope this invitation to address you is not an indication that I've lost my edge. If not, then Chancellor Cantor and the faculty here must be doing something right, if they've instilled in you a healthy respect for controversy and an appreciation for bucking the system.
I think it's essentially impossible to make advances, discoveries and improvements in the human condition without fighting the status quo and established mindsets. Perhaps that's why some of you invited me here today. I sincerely hope most of you are ready to make that fight to change things because I cannot imagine a time in recent history where graduates have a greater challenge facing them. I was born in 1946 as one of only 2.3 billion people on our planet. Today, we have three of us for everybody that existed when I was born. And on October 26 of this year, we're going to pass the 7 billion mark. At the current rate of population growth, we will add the equivalent of another India and China to the world's population in the next 25 years. So just to put it in context with some of the things you've learned, when Columbus first sailed to America, the world's population was only slightly greater than the current population of our country. It took until 1804 to get one billion people on the planet, and it took another 123 years, until 1927, to add the second billion. Today, it's taking less than 12 years to add another billion people to our already crowded, finite biosystem. 
So by your 10th college reunion, how are you going to produce enough food, clean water, medicine, housing, waste treatment and energy for nearly 8 billion people, when we can't do that very well for 1 billion fewer today?
We very clearly need new ideas, new discoveries, new inventions, and new radical changes in how we produce food, how we generate energy, where that energy comes from and how we deal with these issues in society. Is this class of 2011 up for those challenges?
So by burning coal and oil and deforestation, we're currently adding about 14 billion tons of CO2 to the atmosphere each year, as we play Russian roulette with our planet. Are you amongst those that believe that this extreme weather that we're beginning to experience is simply due to random fluctuations? 
Solar and wind technologies can only be part of the energy solution, and unfortunately the recent earthquake and tsunami in Japan washed away in just minutes much of the hope of those who advocated nuclear solutions to some of these problems. We need new disruptive technologies that will change the fundamentals of how we deal with almost everything on the planet. We're now at a point where we're 100 percent dependent on new science and new technology and new breakthroughs for our future. Last century new technologies were based largely on physics. The world has changed and we're now in what many have called the century of biology. And the leading edge of biological advances has been breakthroughs in genomics. 
We just celebrated the 10th anniversary of our first decoding of the human genome, and from that, we learned some rather simplistic things—we learned we have about 20,000 genes instead of the hundreds of thousands that people had expected. And from our reading the DNA from an African American, two Hispanics, two Caucasians and a Chinese individual, we learned that we're all extremely similar to each other, and that race is a social, not a scientific concept.
In 2007, my genome was the first one to be completely decoded, all 6 billion letters read. And now with new technology, we can actually sequence the genome from a single sperm cell or a single egg cell, allowing us to understand what many of you have been asking, and what most people ask: what genetic traits did you get from your mother; what did you get from your father? 
All of today's graduates will likely have your genome sequenced, and your children definitely will. In my view, genomics will become part of the way to reduce health care costs, while improving health quality through preventative medicine. Health care in the USA is currently 17 percent of GDP, and by 2020 it will be over 20 percent. And it's clear we're a very long way from being the highest quality care in the world. As you know, President Obama has driven perhaps what I consider to be the most important recent legislation by making health care accessible to all Americans. Now we have the challenge of improving the quality of that care while we reduce the cost. How will you help change our health care system, its quality and its expense?
From the analysis of my genome, I found that I have an increased risk for heart disease, Alzheimer's disease, melanoma and prostate cancer. Like many males in this country, I've taken a statin, which is one of the few preventative medicines available for heart disease and possibly Alzheimer's disease. Awareness of the melanoma risk actually helped me with early detection and surgical removal of a tumor before it could progress to a dangerous stage. And annual monitoring of prostate cancer symptoms hopefully will aid in early detection if a tumor occurs.
Now here's a real cheery statistic: 60 million people will die on this planet this year. But that number will grow to 68 million by 2030. About 10 percent each year die from injuries, including auto accidents, which for your age group is the No. 1 killer in the United States. Fifteen million of those 60 million will die from communicable diseases. But 37 million will die from non-communicable diseases, including heart disease and cancer. And that number—in your lifetimes—by 2030 is going to grow to 51 million people. So hopefully you can see the important role that genomics and preventative medicine can play in your future. 
Some of our latest advances in genomics have been some of the most exciting to me. When we read the genetic code, we're converting these A's and C's, T's and G's into digital information, the ones and zeros in the computer. I call this "digitizing biology." We sequenced the first genome of a living organism 15 years ago, and since then we've been filling our computer databases with sequence information. My team's recent efforts are now to go in the other direction. We start with this digital information in the computer, bottles of chemicals, and generate new life out of that computer. We actually chemically make the DNA and we boot it up in a cell. I call it "booting up" because just like software in a computer, your DNA is the software of life. 
In 2007 we found that by changing the DNA in a cell, we could completely covert one species into another. So if you change the DNA, you change the species. We've now perfected the ability to write new genetic code from that digitized information and four bottles of chemicals. So this time last year we reported the construction of the first synthetic cell, a cell that self-replicating with a completely synthetic genome. This was the first species to have a computer as its parent, I don't know if it will pay for its college.
We've added watermarks to the DNA to distinguish synthetic life from naturally occurring life. My team developed a new code to enable us to write the entire English language using the four letters of our DNA code. In the case of the first synthetic cell, we included the names of the 46 scientists that contributed to the project. We also included three quotations from literature, including one from James Joyce: "To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate life out of life." Another one from American Prometheus, Oppenheimer's biography: "See things not as they are, but as they might be." And the last one from the late Richard Feynman: "What I cannot create, I cannot understand." 
We also included an email address built into the genetic code, which seemed appropriate for the first species to have a computer as a parent. So at Synthetic Genomics in La Jolla, we now have a computer software set for designing new DNA software, for creating designer cells to help harness the energy of biology for a wide range of applications, including new medicines and vaccines, new fuels, new green chemicals, food, nutritional products— all made starting with carbon dioxide. 
Just think if we can harness the immense power of the billions of years of evolution, together with these new tools of synthetic genomics, that perhaps we have the opportunity to wean ourselves from burning ancient hydrocarbons for energy and transportation, all the while adding more CO2 to the atmosphere. I predict that carbon dioxide will become the future raw material for almost every human endeavor, from energy to chemicals to food. Exxon Mobil provided my company with $300 million to try and create a new algae cell that can produce more than 10,000 gallons of a new biocrude from carbon dioxide, per acre per year. This biocrude can go into their refineries that they can make normal gasoline, diesel and jet fuel from. 
Many of you here are familiar with existing agriculture systems, but they're incredibly inefficient, particularly when we try to use them for alternate energy production. So if we were to try and replace transportation fuels in the U.S. with corn-based fuels, it would require a facility three times the size of our country. If we could do this with synthetic algae, it would require a facility only one-third the size of the state of New York. 
We're now in an era where biology and synthetic genomics—and this is very important for this graduating class—we're limited only by our imaginations right now. Perhaps we can create algae that taste like beef but with higher protein content and nutritional value to help feed a hungry world population. I'm sure you all know that on the order of five million children die each year from malnutrition, a number that's likely to increase with the expanding population. In other areas we're working with NASA trying to design new organisms that would enable distant spaceflight. But what if we could just send digital information into space and have it boot up sometime in the future into new living systems? New emerging infections like SARS and AIDS represent major challenges for the future. We're working with Novartis trying to rapidly produce new flu vaccines using synthetic genomics. Our goal is to create vaccines against emerging infections in hours or days, instead of months or years. 
Now commencement speakers usually give advice on how to be successful. I'm not going to do that. Few who knew me early on would have predicted my success. My path in life was profoundly altered by being drafted—off my surf board—and ending up as a medic in the middle of the Vietnam War. Most of you have no clue as to what unique challenges and highly motivating, life-altering experiences and events that lay in your path. I can only ask and hope that some of you will not get swallowed up into your everyday existence, but rather these incredible challenges for our future will incite you to want to change that future. Change is 100% dependent on motivated individuals. I often get asked at public lectures about pronouncements of futurists who say we're on the verge of perpetuating human life and immortality. My answer to them—and to you—is the only certain way to achieve immortality is to do something highly meaningful with your life the short time you are here. Thank you, congratulations, and best wishes for your future.

Nancy [Cantor], thank you very much for that overly kind introduction. If you don't already know, you have a fabulous chancellor. Board of trustees, Syracuse faculty, all members of the graduating class of 2010: it is a privilege to be here with you today celebrating this important step in your lives, one that I am sure is also a moment of relief and joy for all of you, particularly the parents that are here today.
Graduating today means you are through with final exams, through with submitting term papers, all that nervousness, the cold sweat of sleepless nights preparing to answer seemingly impossible questions. Well, that's a feeling we banking executives know pretty well these days – we call it "testifying before Congress."
I am honored to be here today, but I also know that some of your fellow students have raised questions about me being your commencement speaker. When I heard about these protests, I wanted to understand what was behind them, so I called one of the students leading that movement, and we had a good conversation – I'm sure she's here somewhere. I heard her concerns about me, the nation's banking system and about capitalism itself. Some I thought were legitimate, others I disagreed with. But whether I agree with her or not, I say "good for her;" I'm proud of her for speaking up. In fact, it is completely appropriate to hold me accountable for those things I am responsible for. We all should be held accountable. But what does it mean to hold someone accountable, and how do you make yourself accountable? Today I will talk about what it takes to be accountable, in the hope that it might be valuable to you in years to come.
I want to point out that in sharing my views with you, I do not mean to imply that I did it all right; I did not. Many of the lessons I've learned I've learned by making mistakes. It takes courage to be accountable. Throughout my life, throughout this crisis in the past three years, I've seen many people embarrass themselves by failing to stand up, being mealy-mouthed and acting like lemmings by simply going along with the pack. I also saw plenty of people under enormous pressure who always did the right thing. Graduates, you will soon leave this wonderful community and venture into a new world to get ready for new jobs, new opportunities and new lives. Along the way, you're going to face a lot of pressure. Pressure to go along, to get along, to toe the line, to look the other way when you see things that aren't right, and pressure to do things simply because everybody else is doing them. Never give in to that pressure. Have the fortitude to do the right thing, not the easy thing. Don't be somebody's lapdog or sycophant. Have the courage to speak the truth, even when it is unpopular, and have the courage to put yourself on the line, to strive for something meaningful, and even to risk what would be an embarrassing failure.
I think Teddy Roosevelt understood this nearly a century ago when he said, "It's not the critic who counts, not the man who points out how the strong man stumbles, or whether the doer of deeds could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man – now the woman –who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs, who comes up short again and again, because there is no effort without erring and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deeds, who knows great enthusiasm, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so his place will never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat."
It takes knowledge to be accountable. Having the ability to speak up is important, but it is not sufficient. If you have the guts to take a stand, what you think is a principled stand, then have the brains to base it on facts and analysis and critical thinking. In some places, it's always clear what the right thing to do is, but in many other situations, it is much more complex. There's a temptation to come up with simple and binary answers, especially when it couldn't possibly apply. We should remember what Albert Einstein once said: "Be as simple as possible, but no simpler." Acquiring knowledge must be a lifelong pursuit; it will lead to wisdom and judgment. It will never end. You will learn by reading—and read everything you get your hands on—and by talking to and watching other people, and you especially learn by listening to the arguments on the other side. It is your job to constantly learn and develop informed opinions as you move forward in your lives.
There's some very thoughtful people out there, and reading their views and analysis will help educate you. If you think you are socialist, read Milton Friedman, the famous capitalist. If you think you are capitalist, read Karl Marx. If you think you're Republican, listen to the Democrats, and vice versa. Look for the kernels of truth in what they have to say. Don't reject it all out of hand, and be willing to change your mind. Do not fall into the trap of being rigid and simplistic. It's okay for us at times to blame and be dissatisfied with others and hold them responsible, but it's not okay to oversimplify and paint everyone with the same brush. It should not be acceptable to denigrate entire groups, not all companies, not all CEOs, not all politicians, not all media, not all students. Among these groups there are some terrific people, and among these groups there are some terrible people. To categorically and indiscriminately judge them as all equal is simply another form of prejudice and ignorance, and it's not fair, it's not just, it's just plain wrong.

One must be honest with one's self to be accountable. Shakespeare said it best: "To thine own self be true." There's already a book being written on each and every one of you, and people ask you it every single day. If I want to know all about you, all I would need to do is talk to your teachers, your friends, your colleagues, your fellow students and your parents. I would know if you were trustworthy, hardworking, empathetic, ethical, and if you deliver on your commitments, or if you were lazy and always let people down. It's up to you to determine how you want that book to be written. It's a choice. Don't let others write it for you. So be the person you want to be, set your own high standards of integrity and performance. If you want to be a winner, then compare yourself to the best, and acknowledge that it will never happen without hard work. Abe Lincoln used to say, "Good things may come to those who wait, but only those things left by those who hustle." If you want to be a leader, act like a leader. If you want to be respected and trusted, then demonstrate you deserve it by earning it every day. If you want to be known as honest, not telling lies is not sufficient. Don't even shave the truth, and make sure your friends and colleagues will always bring you back to earth when you—like we all do at times—are deceiving yourself.
It takes knowing how to deal with failure to be accountable. The world is complex and challenging, and yes the economy is getting better, but you are still entering a job market at a tough time. But in fact, throughout your lives, you're going to have to face tough times and failure, both personally and professionally. I'm sure some of you already have. But how you deal with failure may be the most important thing in whether you succeed. Some of the greatest people of all times—I'm thinking of Nelson Mandela, Indira Gandhi, Abe Lincoln and many others—faced enormous setbacks and have persevered, often against seemingly impossible odds.
As you all know, over the past two years we've gone through the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. A lot of attention has been paid to the mistakes made by those who helped bring on the crisis. The first step to dealing with mistakes is to actually acknowledge them, and it is true that many in this crisis have denied any responsibility. But in this crisis, there are also many who take responsibility and do something about it. At the darkest moments when it seemed like the whole system was unraveling, I saw men and women in my company, and in many other companies and in the governments around the world who took extraordinary action. They didn't whine or complain, and when they got knocked down they got up and tried to do something about it. They worked for days and weeks on end without sleep, sacrificing time with family and friends, so they could try to contain the crisis, all the while knowing that they could actually fail at what they were trying to do. They weren't driving themselves for money, or to score points with the boss— they understood that the well-being of millions of people depending on getting the situation under control. They didn't lose their nerve when things seemed bleak, they showed the fortitude that's necessary to handle a tough situation and to deal with life's inevitable setbacks.
That's a lesson I've had to learn in my own professional life. Before I became CEO of JPMorgan Chase, I was president of Citigroup—I just want to mention, that was 10 years ago—and one day I went to work and was very surprised to be fired by the man I had been working with for over 15 years. I remember coming home to explain what happened to my wife and my three young daughters. My wife and one of my daughters is here today, by the way. They were naturally scared about what it meant for our family and for me to have lost my job. My youngest daughter—she's here today¬, she was eight at the time, she has not graduated yet, that's next year ¬—asked, "Dad, will we still keep our house, will we have to live in the street?" and I said "Of course not, darling." My middle daughter, who always looked forward to going to college, asked "Dad, will I still be able to go to college?" and I said "Of course, sweetheart." My oldest daughter, she asked if she could have my cell phone since I wouldn't be needing it any more; she showed the resiliency I'm talking about.
So make no mistake: setbacks will happen and when they do, it's okay to get depressed, to blame others —for a while. Eventually you have to get up, dust yourself off, learn from it, and move on.

It takes humility and humanity to be accountable. We all stand on the shoulders of those who came before us. Humility is the realization that those who came before paved the way. Never fool yourselves into thinking that your success is yours alone. Your success is the result of your parents, the family that sacrificed to give you a better life, your professors and administrators who help you get through your time here at Syracuse, your friends, your neighbors, those who encourage you. In fact, this wonderful country, whose bounties we all benefit from, was built by so many people who made endless sacrifices, often the ultimate sacrifice, before most of us were even born. It's important to respect what they have done, and to be grateful for it.

We also need to have the strength of character to hold ourselves accountable in all aspects of our life. As graduates of this world-class university, you each have what it takes to lead meaningful lives and to contribute to the lives of others. If you continue to be very successful, and little lucky, you may go on to become a leader of large groups of people—and that is a time when it becomes about them, and not about you. Leadership itself is an honor, a privilege and it carries a deep obligation. Throughout your lives, you will meet people who are not as smart, talented and skilled as you. They may not have had all the benefits that you have had, but many of them are doing the best that they can possibly do, and they take great pride in doing their part well. Remaining accountable to them means treating them all with the respect they deserve, whether it's a CEO or a clerk. It requires grace, generosity of spirit and great compassion. To me, that is humanity's highest form of accountability. Our survival and success depends on it.
In the words of the poem that I love by Rudyard Kipling, "If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you, if you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, or walk with kings nor lose the common touch, yours is the earth and everything that's in it."
And so it takes courage, knowledge, a strong sense of self, a capacity to overcome failure, and a healthy amount of humility and humanity to be truly accountable. These qualities are at the heart of our success as a nation. I'd like you to keep one concluding thought in mind: America's success as a nation is not a God-given right. It is something that we all must work hard to achieve. If you've studied history, you see nations and empires rise and fall. The United States and the world has faced many challenges, some far tougher than the ones we face today. And I am confident that we will recover in the short run. But in the long run, you—the next generation—must continue to conquer the challenges we face. We must confront our health and education systems. It should not be acceptable that in the United States of America, only 50 percent of our inner-city school kids graduate high school. We must develop a real, substantive energy and environmental policy. We have had three major energy crises— it is not acceptable to have a fourth. We must build the infrastructure of the future. We must continue to welcome the best and the brightest from around the world to our nation. These are all serious issues but if we work together, we can fix them.
You all have the ability to carry the responsibilities you face in life. In so many ways, all of us in this stadium are truly blessed. We are lucky to live in this country and to have the opportunities we have been given, but that brings obligations. As you go about your life, remember your country. Regarding what you do, and what you achieve in life, try to leave everything and everybody that you touch a little bit better than they were before. Continue to be true to yourself and your values, be resilient, be honest, be humble, never stop holding yourselves accountable, and you will not only have the kind of life you wish and deserve, you will also do your part to make this country and the world a better place for generations to come.
To the Class of 2010, congratulations, good luck and Godspeed. Thank you.

Each winter, alone in the pitiless ice deserts, deep in the most inhospitable terrain on Earth, a truly remarkable journey takes place as it has done for millennia. Thousands abandon the security of their home and clamber onto the frozen ice to begin their long journey into a region so bleak, so extreme, it supports no other wildlife.

Though this might sound like a typical day of class at Syracuse, it is actually taken from an official plot summary for March of the Penguins. Since the release of this award-winning documentary in 2005, a gaggle of other avian films has emerged. In light of this recent trend, we might in fact be closer to these flightless, well-suited creatures than one would think. For starters, just look at us  dressed in dark robes, huddling close together, marching as one in our gigantic igloo, the Dome.

Just as the emperor penguins leave their oceanic refuge to trek into an alien habitat, we, too, have had to leave the comfort of our home nests in making the initial voyage to Syracuse. Forced to adapt to an unfamiliar environment, a sea of unknowns awaited us. Yet think of the friends, mentors and professors with whom we've forged close bonds since our arrival at one time, they were all strange birds. As we encounter new faces in the future, our flocks will continue to expand.

Regarding the weather, we've waddled through some rough forecasts. It wasn't unusual to return from winter break exposed to a steady month's worth of heavy downfalls, piercing winds and sub-zero temperatures. More recently, this semester we were the lucky ones the first students in more than a decade to have classes canceled on account of snow. True, we may not have enjoyed the year-round sunshine of our southern friends such as those in Florida, California or even tropical New Jersey but the harsh conditions have tested our endurance and strengthened our determination. Moreover, we are that much more appreciative of those glorious, rare heat waves when the temperature cracks 40.

But it wasn't all rigid, frozen sidewalks. During our time here, we met high-profile speakers and shook our tail feathers at concerts and parties. Some of us flapped our wings abroad, or perhaps we stayed on the home turf and participated in campus clubs, intramurals and organizations. Furthermore, whenever we were exposed to new situations or overcame obstacles, it gave us all the more reason to celebrate our accomplishments.

Besides the often-inhospitable climate, we've had to confront other challenges on our mission. Exams, papers, deadlines, all-nighters: dangerous predators all around. At times, the stress of our world made the ice feel thin beneath us. Doubt crept in, and we feared for our survival. Yet, sustained by the love and support of family and friends, we stand proud today, ready to leave the nest yet again. The emperor penguins see the fruits of their labor in the birth and growth of their chicks  the continuation of their species. For us, it is the degrees we earn the foundation of our future.

However, graduation is only the tip of our iceberg. At one time, Syracuse seemed like foreign terrain, but now we must head out into broader horizons and dive into larger oceans. So, today, I wish all the emperors of 2007 the best of luck on our new voyages and don't ever let anyone say you can't fly.

Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today, and thank you for this doctorate you’re going to give me. Now I can get out of this dead-end job; get a real career going for myself.

You being here today is proof that you’ve learned a lot, and I hope that the time you were here you’ve learned something very important, and that is that you’ve learned what it is you love. If you haven’t learned it by now, I hope you learn it soon in the future because if there’s any advice I can give to you, it’s do what you love. Don’t do it for security, or status, prestige, money, or– for crying out loud–don’t do it for somebody else. Do it for love. Because if you love what you do, you’ll always do what you love.

And if you’re doing what you love, you’re going to become very good at it. And this is a country that rewards excellence. And actually, I think this is my fifth or sixth doctorate I’m getting, and I didn’t graduate high school. I went to the college of the road, I guess. I admire you for having the gumption to stick it out. I didn’t do it, and I sometimes wish I had more of an education in what it is I do. That’s why I like to try to help music programs. 

I want you to really think about what it is you love and to go forth from here and do that. You’re going to do us all a favor if you’re good at what you do because–amazingly–you’re going to find how much incompetence there is, and mere competence nowadays is rewarded–and recorded, too. 

How is this showing up on that screen? [reference to scoreboard close captioning] I don’t have a script. 

Anyway, we need more people who are good at what they do. And if you’re doing what you love, you will be good at it. Money may come, money may go, but you can always fall back on love. It’s something you can always depend on.

I’m not here to give you a big song and dance. Maybe a song. 

I scribbled a little thing on the way up here. You have to help me out with this, okay?

This is sung to the tune of an old song called “Down in New Orleans.”


Hey, hey I said hey, hey, hey, yeahWell come on everybody, take a trip with me Upstate to Syracuse University A lot of hard work is what it takes You can get an education in the Finger Lakes You get a bachelor of science or an arts degree Here at Syracuse University

I said heyI said hey, hey, hey, yeah

Come on everybody take a trip with me Up to Onondaga County, that’s where I’ll be Oh, you’re going to be a lawyer or an engineer You can even study music in the college here With any luck you’ll even get a Ph.D Here at Syracuse University

I said heyI said hey, hey, hey, yeah

Thank you!

Thank you for that introduction, and good morning, everyone. I would like to start off by congratulating this graduating class. Just as though a chimpanzee were here to say “Hey, you’ve done great, this is exciting.”

And if there was time, I would greet each one of you with the chimpanzee exuberance of congratulations, which is an embrace and a kiss. We won’t have time for that, unfortunately. It is amazing to me to think that a little girl that was born in England, in London, over 70 years ago now, to a family without enough money for a bicycle, let alone a motorcar, is now traveling around the world and being invited to speak on a wonderful occasion like this. And I ask myself, “How did it happen?”

And it makes me think of a book, a story which perhaps some of you know-how the birds got together and had a competition to see who could fly the highest. And the mighty eagle was sure that he would win, with those strong wings he flies higher and higher, and the other birds get tired. And in the end, even the eagle can fly no higher. But that’s all right, because where he is, he’s up above everyone-at least that’s what he thought. But hiding in the feathers of his back is a tiny little jenny wren, and now she flies up, and flies highest of all. And the reason I love this story is because it’s so symbolic. If we think of our life as an effort to always fly just a little bit higher, to reach a goal that’s just a little bit out of our grasp, how high can we go by ourselves? We all need our eagle. And when I look back over my life, and I think of the wonderful people who’ve supported me throughout, I think of them as like the feathers on my eagle. There are all those working at Gombe National Park, where the chimpanzees still continue after 45 years, and I think of the amazing friends everywhere I go; there are wonderful friends, people who’ve helped me through difficult times, like John Couri sitting here, who was the person who invited me here in the first place, from your board of trustees at Syracuse. I think of the amazing people working in the Jane Goodall Institute, and for our Roots and Shoots program, and there’s a group of them over there, Mary and Rob and Katherine and Rick.

But most of all, I think of my family. And in particular, as you heard, my mother. And all I’ll say about my mother now, is that when I was 10 years old, I fell in love with Tarzan. I mean, of course a little girl, loving animals, reading books like “Doctor Doolittle,” reading about Tarzan of the Apes-I fell madly in love with him. And he married that wimpy Jane! Was I ever jealous. But at any rate, that was when I decided, “When I grow up, I will go to Africa, I will live with animals, I will write books about them.” But back then, Africa was the Dark Continent. It was filled with poison arrows and sinister messages going out on the drumbeats at night. And we didn’t have any money. And girls didn’t do that sort of thing. But the only person who didn’t laugh at me, who didn’t say “Jane, get real-think about something you can achieve,” was my mother. She used to say, “Jane, if you really want something, if you work really hard, if you take advantage of opportunity, and if you never give up, you will achieve your goal.” And you young graduates, you had a dream-your dream was to get this precious degree that you’re receiving today, as a result of your hard work and taking opportunities. And as you take it, think of these amazing people who’ve helped you reach one of the first goals in your life, like your feathers-big, strong feathers and small ones, with every one taking its part.

During the 45 years that we’ve studied these amazing chimpanzee beings, it becomes ever more striking how like us they are. Kissing, embracing, holding hands, patting each other on the back, long-term supportive affectionate bonds between mothers and their offspring that can last 60 or more years. The fact that they can have emotions like happiness, sadness, fear and despair. They have vivid personalities. And biologically, the structure of DNA they have differs from us by only 1 percent. And today we acknowledge that there is nothing in the animal kingdom alive today more like us than the chimpanzee.

When I first went to Cambridge University to get a Ph.D., I was told I’d done everything wrong. I shouldn’t have given the chimpanzees names; they should have been numbers-that would be more scientific. And I couldn’t talk about their personalities, their minds or their feelings-that was anthropomorphic. But at that time, I had not been to the university. I did my Ph.D. without a B.A. But instead of being intimidated by these professors, I thought back to my childhood. My dog, Rusty-he taught me that animals do have personalities and minds and feelings. And I tell this story to you young students moving on now. Have the courage of your convictions. Keep an open mind. But don’t let other people convince you that you’re wrong until you’ve really thoroughly explored your own beliefs. Can they stand up? If they can, have the courage of those convictions.

It’s very sad to find that these amazing chimpanzees who taught us so much about our place in the natural world are in such grave danger in the wild. They are becoming extinct as we speak. They are being horribly abused in many captive situations. When I realized the full extent of their plight, in 1986 at a conference, when we had a session on conservation and a session on conditions in captivity and in labs and circuses, it was a gathering for the first time of all those people studying chimpanzees across Africa and in captivity. I went into that conference as a scientist. I planned to continue collecting data, working with my students in Africa. I came out as an activist. Since that day, I have not spent more than three weeks in any one place. I realized that I had to try and do something for these amazing chimpanzees, that the more I began traveling around Africa, talking to heads of state in the different countries, to try and help people understand what was going on, the more I realized that so many of Africa’s problems can be laid directly to the unsustainable lifestyles of most of us in the Western world. And I found that so many problems around the world are interlinked, so that understanding one problem raises other questions about other problems that caused it. And I found that, as I traveled, I met many young people like you that seemed to have little hope for the future. Not on a day like today, but maybe in high school, maybe in your early days at college. Today is a day of joy. But think back, perhaps, to some days when you looked at what’s happening in the world, and you felt it was a pretty bleak world. And it is, isn’t it? If we think of the developing world, we think of the crippling poverty, the hunger, disease, the ethnic conflicts, if we think of forests going and deserts spreading, and animals disappearing, sometimes forever, and the loss of biodiversity, and we think about how we are poisoning this beautiful planet, so that in some cases, children are born, and the air they breathe, the water they drink, the food they eat, is making them sick. And when I was talking to these students around the world, they mostly told me, “We feel that you compromised our future to such an extent that it’s not going to be possible for us to turn things around.”

And that’s what led to this Roots and Shoots program, that is now in more than 90 countries. It began 12 years ago. It’s a program with a symbolic name. Roots make a firm foundation. Shoots seem tiny, but with each the sum together they can break through a brick wall. See the brick wall as all these problems that we have inflicted on the climate. Then you see it’s a message of hope. Hundreds and thousands of young people like you around the world can break through, can make this world a better place. That’s what you’re celebrating today-the power of the individual to make a difference. That is the main message of Roots and Shoots-every individual impacts the world every single day. And that means you and me. What we do does indeed matter. Every Roots and Shoots group chooses three different kinds of project to make the world a better place. For people, your own community, reaching out to tsunami earthquake victims and those living in abject poverty. Projects that make things better for animals-domestic animals, the animals we eat, the animals we share our homes with, as well as wildlife. And to make things better for the environment that we all share and that today is so sick. Roots and Shoots is very much about breaking down the barriers that we build between people of different cultures, different ethnic groups, different religions, different countries. We know that in many cases, we need to change attitudes around the world. We don’t want to change those attitudes through violence, through guns and warfare. We say that our tools for change are knowledge and understanding. Know the facts, think of the big picture, hard work and persistence, roll up your sleeves, do something. And don’t give up if it doesn’t work the first time. And finally, and most important of all, love and compassion, leading to respect for all life.

The question I’m asked most often is, “Dr. Jane, you talk about hope. You’ve written a book called Reason for Hope. You can talk for reason to hope. Do you really have hope? Can you look around at the dark, frightening world today and say, ‘I truly have hope’?”

I wouldn’t stand here and tell you I had hope if I didn’t. My reasons for hope are simplistic perhaps, but they work for me. First of all, the human brain-think what we’ve done. Think about the brain, you young people graduating today, how this little funny thing in your head has helped you get the degree that you’re going to go away with. We’ve been to the moon. We’ve created amazing technology to keep people alive. Christopher Reeve would have been dead long before, but for the wonders of modern technology. So would my own mother; she had an artificial valve in her heart. So how do you think it is, that this amazing creature with its wonderful brain, so clever-how is it that we’re also making weapons of mass destruction, and creating technology that destroys, and farming by putting poison on the soil that is reaching into our bodies-what’s happened? Do you know what I think? I think there’s been a disconnect sometimes, between this wonderful brain and our human heart. And that disconnect means that we lose wisdom. And maybe we’re clever, but we need to be wise. So remember, again, graduates, as you move out into the world, think about the importance of human love and compassion, and link that to your brains, your enthusiasms, and everything that you do.

My second reason for hope is the amazing resilience of nature. We can destroy things, we can pollute rivers, we can create a horrible bare stretch of land which was once beautiful. But, give it time, have some help, and once again it can be restored. That is the great hope in Africa where trees have been cut down and deserts have spread-with love, with hope and understanding, once again, the deserts can grow trees. That is the hope for the chimpanzees, and so many other creatures. Animals on the very brink of extinction can be given a second chance. And right close to here, one of those miracles happened, with the peregrine falcon, now in many places off the endangered species list.

The third reason for hope is the tremendous energy, determination, enthusiasm and sometimes courage of young people. I’m asked, “Where do you get the strength to travel 300 days a year all over the world?” I get it from groups of young people with shining eyes. And our programs now are pre-school right through university, even springing up in prisons and senior citizen residences. And everywhere I go, there are people with shining eyes, young people, telling me what they’ve done to make the world a better place. And through our programs, these young people are now linked together around the world. Yes, there is great hope in this enthusiasm, dedication, commitment.

Finally, the indomitable human spirit. You’ve already heard that talked about from this very lectern this morning-Roosevelt, Christopher Reeve, I could add many more, like Nelson Mandela. But it’s not just the people we hear about. This indomitable human spirit, these people who tackle seemingly impossible tasks, inspire those around us, people who overcome seemingly crippling physical disabilities, and lead lives that are inspirational to everyone-they’re all around us. They’re out in the streets, they’re in the stores, they’re in the garden, they’re in every country-and I am so proud to call so many of them my friends. So with these three reasons for hope-yes, I do have hope.

And with my last few minutes, a story. It’s a story about a chimpanzee who was born in Africa. He was captured by shooting his mother; that’s the only way you can capture a young chimpanzee. He was shipped off to North America, to live in a zoo for about 15 years, alone in a small, old-fashioned cage with a cement floor and iron bars. He was named Jojo. Then, a new zoo director raised the money for a huge enclosure, which was surrounded by a moat filled with water, because chimpanzees don’t swim, and 19 other chimpanzees were brought in. They were all carefully introduced to each other, because that’s always a problem-there is a dominance conflict to sort out. But finally they were put out in the enclosure. Everything was fine for a while, and then one of the new young males starts challenging Jojo-swaggering from foot to foot, waving branches, slapping with his hands, stamping with his feet, looking big and fierce. Jojo didn’t know what it meant. Jojo had not had an opportunity to learn. He was terrified. He ran into the water. Didn’t know anything about water, either. In his fear, he got over the barrier that was built to prevent chimpanzees from drowning in the deep water beyond. Three times he came up gasping for air, and then he disappeared under the water.

Luckily for Jojo, there was a man there who visits the zoo one day a year with his wife and three little girls. And he jumped in, even though a keeper grabbed him and told him he would be killed, that male chimpanzees are stronger than us and can be dangerous. He pulled away, and swam, feeling under the water, touched Jojo, and got this 130-pound dead weight over his shoulder, felt some movement, got over the barrier, pushed Jojo up into the enclosure, and rejoined his rather hysterical family.

There was a woman there with a camera, who doesn’t remember filming, but she did. So you can look at that piece of video and see and hear what happened next. The people on the far side of the moat start screaming at Rick to come back, that he’s going to be killed, because they can see three big male chimps, with hair bristling , coming to see what the commotion is. And at the same time, Jojo is sliding back into the water because the bank was too steep. And for a moment, the camera is all over the place, but amazingly it steadies on Rick with one hand on the railing, and you see him looking up at his family, looking up at these three males, and then looking down at Jojo just disappearing under the water. And for a moment he stands there, motionless, and then he went back. Then again he pushed Jojo up, and went on pushing, and he ignores his family and the people and the three approaching chimps. And he pushes and pushes and Jojo’s making feeble efforts, and just in time grabs onto a thick tuft of grass, and just in time, Rick gets back over the barrier as Jojo pulls himself to safety. And that evening, that little piece of film was flashed across North America, and the then-director of the Jane Goodall Institute saw it. And he called up Rick and said, “That was a very brave thing to do. You must have known it was dangerous. Everyone was telling you. What made you do it?” And he said, “Well you see, I happened to look into his eyes, and it was like looking into the eyes of a man. And the message was, ‘Won’t anybody help me?'”

And you see, that’s the message I’ve seen in so many eyes as I’ve traveled around the world. Chimpanzees for sale in the market, elephants chained on cement, dogs thrown out in the street. I’ve seen it in the eyes of children who’ve seen their parents killed in the ethnic conflicts, in the eyes of kids in our inner cities mixed up with violence with nowhere to go. And if you see that look, and you feel it in your heart, you have to jump in and try to help. And my greatest feeling of hope is that although maybe there are more problems in the world today than ever before, wherever I’ve been, whatever problem I have encountered, there has always been a person or a group of dedicated passionate people risking their health or their lives, sometimes giving up their lives, working for nothing or a mere pittance, in order to try to right that wrong. That’s what Roots and Shoots is all about. But also, that’s what it’s going to be like for you, you young people moving away from the safe home that you’ve had, going out into the world. You will see this look. You will see it more than you should ever have to see it. And then it will be up to your heart and your wisdom to decide what to do.

So that’s my last message. There is hope in this world. There truly is hope. There is so much going on that is so exciting, so vibrant, more perhaps now than ever before. And set against the darkness, there is this brightness, these shining lights that you carry as you move out. Let them light the darkness. Light other lights with them. You know the saying “One candle can light a hundred more without dimming, but making the world bright.” Take your light and do that. And see these looks for help in eyes, and use the skill you’ve gained, the wisdom you’ve acquired, the knowledge that you’re able to move on confidently into this world. Remember those who’ve helped you get there, without whom you cannot move forward. And my real, hearty congratulations to you on this very joyous day. And I hope your celebrations go on all night, and you take this spirit with you and remember it when there are dark times ahead, as there will be. Never forget this wonderful day, and again congratulations.

Congratulations and Happy Mother's Day. 

Time is precious and short so I'll get right to the point. You asked me to come, so I'm here. And I asked myself, "What could I say to this August body that's meaningful, and personal and true?" I want to offer this suggestion to you: The best way to live in this world is with a mother's heart. Yes. A mother's heart is brave. A mother's heart is keenly intelligent. 

A mother's heart is resourceful and quick and skilled in action. A mother's heart is flexible. A mother's heart is sustained and empowered by the purity of its intentionts soul intentiono see the family through. Yes. And to encourage each member of the family with its diverse, individual personalities. To embrace the family as a whole with love and respect. Unyielding in this effort, the mother's heart sacrifices its own pleasure for the well-being of the family. 

My great wish for all of you is that you would understand that this takes great effort and sustained and renewed commitment, that you would each come to regard this world and all of its inhabitants as your family and that you would embrace it with a mother's heart. 

May all of your days be filled with brilliant sunrises and magnificent sunsets, and may you take the time to regard them. And just like the mother's heart, may you live in constant remembrance and gratitude for the one who created you. And may good fortune always attend you in all of your endeavors nd tonight may you throw down and celebrate, celebrate, celebrate! 

The world that you want to live in needs you to create it. The world that you want to live in needs you to create it. So live in it, and create it with a mother's heart.

Congratulations.

Thank you, Chancellor Shaw, Dr. Freund, Alumni President Fritsche, SUNY-ESF President Murphy, members of the faculty, distinguished guests, parents and members of the Class of 2003. First, I thank you for the wonderful welcome. I am delighted to be in the Carrier Dome. I have looked at this place on television for so long, I always wondered what it would feel like to be in here. I couldn't feel more at home unless I were forty years younger and had a football or basketball in my hand. 

I want to congratulate the parents on all you have done, especially the mothers this day who helped their children reach this milestone. I want to thank the teachers for what they have done. I am in the process of writing my memoirs and it's a great act of rediscovery. My teachers come out big in my memoirs, and I realize now what a profound impact they were having on me even when I did not know it at the time. So I hope all of you will find a way over the next few days to thank one of your professors for what they did. 

I am well aware that my speech is the only thing that stands between you and your diploma. Thirty-five years ago when I was a senior at Georgetown, we used to have commencements outside. Our commencement speaker was Washington, D.C. Mayor Walter Washington. And just as the mayor got up to speak, a huge storm cloud came over. The mayor looked at us and said, and this was the speech he gave, verbatim: "Ladies and gentlemen, if we don't get out of here, we're all going to drown. I will send you a printed copy of my remarks. Congratulations and good luck." Our class loved Mayor Washington, and I will try to remember his example here today. 

I've been touched in many ways by this city and this great university. I have been grilled extensively by Ted Koppel, Class of 1960. I have watched sports called by Bob Costas, Class of '74. I have danced to a lot of music played by the ageless Dick Clark, Class of '51. That's unbelievable. Something in the water in Lake Onondaga. I love this city. I come to the State Fair every year with Hillary, I've vacationed in Skaneateles, I have eaten more Dinosaur barbecue than any person who does not live in the city of Syracuse. 

And as a longtime and utterly fanatic basketball fan, I watched with awe as Syracuse rolled through the NCAA tournament. I got to shake hands with Coach Boeheim today, and I was thinking how remarkable it is that he came here in 1962 as a freshman when President Kennedy was in office. Co-captain of his college team with the great Dave Bing in 1966, he stuck with you for a very long time. Coach, congratulations on a job well done, and thanks to you and the team for the gifts of a lifetime for all of us basketball fans who will never forget what happened. 

I would also like to say a special word of appreciation to the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry. They have worked for two things that are really important to me. I worked very hard in my administration to clean up what are called "brown fields" -- environmentally polluted sites that can then be recovered. My wife, your junior senator, has done a lot of work with this campus on that. I also want to thank them for the research they are doing on biochips that will detect chemical and biological pollutants in our water -- something that is very important. A lot of you know that New York City has the largest untreated water supply in the world, and it's the best city water around, but we have to protect it. And thanks to the work they're doing there [at SUNYESF], we've got a chance to do it. So I thank them for their work as well. 

The world you enter today in 2003 may seem very different from the world you left when you embraced the confines of Syracuse in 1999. In 1999, the economy was strong, the world was making progress toward peace in Northern Ireland and the Middle East, Bosnia and Kosovo. Science and technology seemed to offer limitless possibilities for progress and prosperity. Since you came here in that year, you have seen a close presidential election resolved in the Supreme Court; a lethal attack on the United States in New York, Pennsylvania and Washington; conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq; the continuing war on terror; the failure of many, many high-tech companies; and the reversal of economic progress. 

Here's what I want to say to you as you go out with your education. There's a big difference between the trend lines and the headlines. And one of the things that you need to be able to do as you leave here is to draw that distinction. To understand when you see a headline, if it's troubling or a good one, if it's consistent with the trend line. And to know that it is your job as citizens, either of our country or of some 70 other nations from which you come, to try to build your trend lines. For the world of 1999 and the world of 2003 are actually not so very different. In 1999, we had the dangers of terror and weapons of mass destruction – it's just that they weren't in the headlines because they hadn't happened here. But we were working hard to deal with them. 

And in 2003, I think of all the things that have happened that are good in the four years you've been here. An international consortium of scientists sequenced the human genome, opening the prospects that those of you who are students here, when you bring your babies home from the hospital, they'll have little gene cards that will tell you what their strengths and weaknesses are, and how to raise them so their life expectancy soon will be about 90 years. Raising the prospect that, along with advances in nanotechnology, all cancers will someday be curable because you will identify tumors at submicroscopic level, before they can metastasize. 

Our great adversaries in the Cold War, China and Russia, have largely been reconciled to the West. And you don't worry about a nuclear explosion destroying all of humanity, as I did when I was your age. America is reaching out to Africa and the Caribbean in trade; the president is supposed to triple America's AIDS efforts to help people deal with HIV and AIDS. The rich countries of the world gave an unprecedented amount of debt relief to the poorest countries, if they would agree to put their money into health care, education and economic development. That, too, happened while you were here. 

So what I want to say is, whether it was 1999 or 2003, you live in an era where the world is constantly full of positive and negative developments, and where they are related to each other. In 1988, when Pan Am 103 went down in Scotland, a terrorist act, and those wonderful students from Syracuse perished, it marked the beginning of America's clear vulnerability to global terror, although we had lost people in the ‘70s and early ‘80s, too. On September 11, 2001, we lost people from 70 nations in our country. But today, when we hand out these diplomas, we will give diplomas to people from 70 nations, at Syracuse. 

So here's the trend line. There's the good headlines and the bad headlines. The trend line is, we are growing more interdependent. We cannot escape each other. We reap enormous benefits and assume greater risks. Your job, as a citizen of this country or some other, as a citizen of the world, is to spread the benefits and reduce the risks. To move from an age of interdependence to a global community where we share values and benefits and responsibilities. That is the trend line. 

You can't stop the bad headlines. And even if you ignore them, there'll always be good headlines. But I want the trend lines to be right for you. Therefore, even though I disagree with the position France took in the recent conflict over Iraq, I think too much has been made of it. Because the trend line is toward cooperation. Did you know that there are only two groups of soldiers in Afghanistan today, where the people live who caused September 11, only two are training the new Afghan army -- French soldiers and American soldiers, working side by side. That is the trend line. There are German soldiers in Afghanistan. All the people who thought we were making a mistake on the timing and substance of Iraq supported us after we lost all those people on 9/11. That is the trend line, and that is what we can think about. 

Let me give you another example. About a week before the NCAA tournament began, a little less than two months ago on March 15, the World Health Organization issued a global alert warning of a new virus in southern China. Scientists now believe the epidemic was spread by a single sneeze or cough at Hong Kong's Metropolitan Hotel on February 21. That's the disease we now call SARS. It came amazingly quickly, about the time the military conflict in Iraq started, but it is very different. First, no army can fight a microbe. Even the best military in the world. Night-vision goggles don't protect you against a sneeze. And how can you seal off a border like America's border with Canada? The last invasion from the north came in the War of 1812. Syracuse students cross this border all the time. And it puts you on the front lines of the North American battle against SARS. 

Now, how was SARS fought? Here's the trend line, not the headline -- although in this case, they're pretty similar. It was fought by international cooperation. In particular, by the World Health Organization, an arm of the now-reviled United Nations. The WHO alerted the world to the emerging danger of SARS. It pressured the Chinese government to be more open and give more information for the benefit of its own people and trading and travel partners. And it was a 46-year-old doctor from WHO, Dr. Carlo Urbani, who first identified SARS, first warned the world, and he became one of its first victims. That UN employee gave his life so that you could be more safe. 

I say this because we have to remember the trend line. We have lots of problems with infectious diseases. Only about 435 people have died from SARS, although it is extremely virulent. During the same period, every single day 8,000 kids die from preventable childhood diseases. Every single day. One in four people in the world this year will die from AIDS, TB, malaria and infections related to diarrhea. Last year, three million people died from tuberculosis, and over a million from malaria. Forty-two million people are infected with the HIV virus. That's one of the reasons that I spend as much time as I do in Africa and the Caribbean, trying to roll back the infection rate, to make our economic empowerment and racial reconciliation themes work – because if we don't deal with infectious diseases, they will have bad economic effects and bad political effects. The same arguments apply to global warming. 

The same arguments apply to poverty. So here's my argument: We need a strong security policy. We should have a strong military. Sometimes we have to use it. But over the long run, the trend line will require us to make a safer world by cooperating with others. And, therefore, I think America should be just as determined to lead the world against the threat of infectious diseases, the threat of poverty and ignorance, the threat of global warming, as we are about leading the world against the threat of terrorism. 

I applaud President Bush for proposing to triple funding from America to combat HIV and AIDS, including providing greater treatment to those with the disease in 14 poor nations in Africa and the Caribbean. I hope this money will not come at the expense of other global assistance and that more of it will go through the global fund for AIDS, TB and malaria, so that we can help all the nations that need it. But make no mistake about it. This is a big first step. This amounts to a 20 percent increase in our overall commitment to foreign assistance. 

And here's what I want you to know. As wonderful as it is, it's just a beginning. Because America gives a smaller percent of its budget to proven assistance programs that work than any other rich country in the world. We rank 22nd out of 22. We could double our foreign assistance for fighting infectious disease, ignorance and poverty, and global warming. ... If you believe America should have a strong defense against terror, but has to have a defense against these other threats, and has to build a war with more partners and fewer terrorists, you have an education – go out and tell people you know that we should continue to build on President Bush's AIDS initiative until we have doubled our foreign assistance and we are doing our fair share to build a war with more partners and fewer terrorists. 

I want to close with a very specific request. First, I hope that more of you will personally serve in the Peace Corps, AmeriCorps or tutoring, or even on modest salaries when you leave here, contributing to other people who do that. Not all the work of the world can be done by governments. Second, I hope that all of you will vote and will get involved in politics. Your generation, to be fair, has gotten a bum rap. You do more community service than any previous generation of young Americans, and you should get credit for it. But whether it is because you're turned off by the press coverage or by the insurmountable nature of the problems, you are less likely to vote and participate in politics than previous generations of young Americans. And that's a big mistake, because it does make a difference. 

President Kennedy spoke here in 1957 and reminded the graduates, "The duty of the scholar, particularly in a republic such as ours, is to contribute objective views and a sense of liberty to the affairs of the state and nation." I can honestly say to you that after all the fights I've had, and I've had some pretty good ones in the eight years I was president, on the day I walked out of the White House for the last time, I was more hopeful and more idealistic -- about the ability of free people to solve their problems and meet their challenges, and the ability of our system to change, survive, to improve, to form a more perfect union – than I was on the day I walked in. 

What I worry about is whether those of you who are willing to make those kind of sacrifices, who don't want power for power's sake, who aren't interested in defending some vested interest -- I wonder whether you are willing to make the sacrifice and undertake the burdens of public service and public participation. But I can tell you, don't you ever believe it doesn't make a difference. It does, and you must increase your involvement in American public affairs if you want the kind of world I have talked about today. 

Now I want to make this one last point. I know you've got reasons to be scared -- people were scared after 9/11, so they quit flying around on airplanes for a while. People were scared about SARS and now believe it's in Chinatown, in lower Manhattan. Hillary had to go down there the other day to do an event at the restaurants because their economy has been devastated -- as if you're Chinese anywhere, you might be carrying SARS. There's a Japanese restaurant near my house where the business has fallen off just because people are generally afraid. 

I want to say something about that. Fear is not a stupid emotion, and people who live without any fear are often stupid. But people who are paralyzed by fear are unfailingly miserable and unsuccessful. 

The late Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who taught here between '59 and '61 and came back here to the Maxwell School after he left office, wrote an amazing article in the Washington Post not long before he died, calling for "a return to the power of openness." By that he meant something very specific. Moynihan was upset that all of these beautiful government buildings in Washington were closed to the general public because of fears about attack. And he said if the people who paid for them can't get in to see them, what good are they in the first place? 

He also was making a larger point. If we're afraid to open our buildings or fly on airplanes or go to conventions or walk up the steps into meetings and speak our minds, then we have already given the terrorists and infectious diseases a victory. If we live in fear and reaction only, we have already consigned ourselves at least to a partial defeat. And Moynihan was urging us not to respond to terror and fear in a way that compromises the character of our country or the future of our children. 

So, of course, we have to stand against the bad things of world, and, of course, we have to be afraid where it's appropriate. And we only know how to deal with SARS, for example, through quarantining. But the genius of America, and a free and knowledgeable people everywhere of good will, is to work together to make a greater tomorrow -- not to only react in fear but to act in hope and conviction and belief that for all the differences in this world we have, which make our lives so much more interesting, our common humanity matters more. 

All of human history can be seen in part as a race between the forces of the builders and the forces of the wreckers -- those who believe they have the total truth and they can only rise if someone else were falling. And every single time, since people first rose out of the African savannah a hundred thousand years ago, when it came down to it, the builders have prevailed. The people who believed in our independence have prevailed, the people who believed in our common humanity have prevailed. I want you to use your education to make sure that in the 21st century, we prevail. 

Thank you, and God bless you.

It is very nice of all of you to invite me here to speak you with the families from different parts of the country and the world.


I'm sorry. I don't need to do that. You know why I do that when I start speaking? It's compulsive. I spent before I was mayor, I was the United States Attorney in New York, and I spent four thousand hours listening to men on tape talk that way. I used to sit in a little room listening to a tape recorder of members of organized crime and they would spend their time talking about their wives, their children, their families, just like everyone else. All of a sudden, just when you were about to fall asleep, you would hear them say something like, Hey, we're gonna whack that guy! And you realize that you had to wake up and do something about it. So I kind of fall into that because it brings me back to those days.

I want to thank you very much for inviting me, and the Chancellor in particular who asked me would I be dissuaded by the fact there might be protests. I said actually, No, I would feel at home.


After getting elected mayor I realized I had $2.3 billion deficit in my budget. So one of the things I had to do in the first three or four months that I was in office, was to cut New York City's budget dramatically in order to balance it. So it created a protest or two a day for about three or four months.

Finally one day a group showed up at City Hall protesting our budget. And one of our deputy mayors noticed that we had actually in this particular case increased the funding for this group by ten percent. They were getting two million dollars more in the new budget than in the old budget. He was very happy and he ran outside to the head of the protestors and he showed them the budget, the additional money he was getting. The guy said Gee, thank you, that's wonderful. And then my deputy mayor said, I hope maybe you'll say something positive and end the protest. The guy looked at the budget, he looked at all the protesters he had and said, Well, we're here now. We'll do it for practice. So we had the protest anyway, so I got used to it at that point.

The reality is that this is a very important day for all of you, and maybe even more so for your families. First, let me wish all of the mothers in the audience happy Mother's Day. This is a wonderful day on which to have your child graduate.

And I know it's impossible to focus on a graduation or a commencement now without asking a question, because you're all moving out into the work world or further education, and there are lots of people who walk around nowadays saying that America is more dangerous than it was before September 11, that you have to face more dangers than you had in the past, you have to face realities that others didn't have to face. I'd like to give you a different view of that.

The reality is that New York and America is not more dangerous than it was before September 11. The reality is that we are less dangerous and safer than we were before, because we're dealing with reality now. We're dealing with the truth.


Before September 11 we were living like there was a cloud, a veil in front of our eyes. We didn't see what was going on in the world clearly or precisely enough. We didn't understand that there was the kind of hatred for what we are and who we are that could inspire a monstrous attack like that. Maybe we partially understood it, maybe we understood it somewhat, but we didn't understand it with the full drama with which we should have understood it.

And now we do. And in a way, just like human beings grow up and mature as they understand the realities of life, nations grow up and mature when they understand the realities they actually face. And now we're doing that. We're facing the reality, and you're much stronger for it, both emotionally and in practicality, than you were before.

The reason for that is something that I realized maybe 45 minutes or one hour after the attack, after we were trapped in a building and were able to get out on the street, in between the time of the first and second towers collapsing. When I got out on the street, it was like being in a nuclear holocaust. It was cloudy, almost impossible to see and debris falling through the street. I was trying to communicate with people in New York City, to try to tell them to remain calm, that everything was being done that could be done and to evacuate to the north , because that's what the head of the fire department, who died about 20 minutes after I talked to him, told me to do, Chief Gansey.

And as I was talking to the press and telling them what Chief Gansey had told me to say, I kept looking around while I was speaking to see how people were reacting. I wanted to see if they were panicking. I wanted to see if they were knocking each other over or hurting each other in panic and in fear. What I saw was that they were doing exactly what I was asking them to do. They were fleeing, they were weaving, they were moving quickly and in some cases they were running, but they weren't panicking. They weren't running each other over, they weren't pushing each other aside. In fact, I could see examples of just the opposite. I could see people stopping and leaning over and helping other people, and pushing other people along, and being just as concerned for the safety of the people around them as they were for their own safety.

And immediately, even within 30 to 35 minutes of the collapse and extricating ourselves from a building, I began to get a sense of strength and optimism, that something was happening here that would overwhelm the ferociousness of this attack. And then later that day, as I thought about the enormity of the numbers of people that we had lost, including close friends of mine, and people that I love and care about and people I had seen 25 minutes before they died, as I was feeling the burden of that, I first saw a copy of a photograph that I know you've seen.

But it was the first time I really felt optimism and strength. And it was the photograph of the three firefighters who placed the American flag on top of six stories of fallen building. I knew what those firefighters were encountering. The flames there were 2,000 to 2,500 degrees Fahrenheit. The flames were going on below them, and they were standing six stories above, and they raised the American flag, and it said to me right there emotionally that there's nothing stronger than the spirit of a free people.

When we're not attacked, when things are normal and easy, when things are the way we expect them to be, we take all of this for granted. We take the flag for granted, we take our democracy for granted, we take our religious freedom for granted, we take our respect for the rights of others and for law for granted, and we don't realize that these rights don't exist all over the world. We don't realize that most human beings have lived through their entire lives without rights like this.

But when they attack us and please, when you talk about September 11, do not talk about just a tragedy. It was not just a tragedy. A tragedy is a horrible natural occurrence. When you talk about September 11 and you remember it for the rest of your lives, remember that it was an attack, not just a tragedy. And remember why we were attacked, so we can respond properly.

We were attacked because we're a country of beliefs and philosophy. There is no American ethnic group; we're all ethnic groups. There is no American religion; we're all religions, or none. There is no American race; we're all races, and combinations of races.

So what are we? We're not like the French or the Spanish or the Japanese or the Chinese, what are we? We're people who believe in the same things. We're people of belief, who have a philosophy that we're proud of, that holds us together and gives us strength, and it's a philosophy that we should hold dear.

And it becomes enormously important at points of attack. It doesn't matter whether or not it's the worst crisis of your life, or if it's just a problem that you have to face. Please remember the two things that I think brought my firefighters and my police officers and my rescue workers and all of the others who saved thousands and thousands of lives, giving up their own, at the World Trade Center.

When I think of them, I think of one particular firefighter representing the others. He had gotten injured the day before September 11, and he was at the doctor's office at 8 o'clock in the morning, because he wasn't supposed to go to work that day. The doctor determined that he couldn't go back to duty for several weeks because of the injuries he had sustained. Just as he was told that, he heard about the attack at the World Trade Center.

He was in Brooklyn, and he was told to go home and not to report to duty. Instead, he went to a fire house in Brooklyn that had been evacuated because they had gone to the World Trade Center. He went to the locker of another firefighter and took out his bunker gear, and put it on, and he left a note.

In the note he explained who he was and why he had taken the bunker gear, and then as an afterthought in the note he said, Please tell my mother and father that I love them very much and that I owe everything to them, and tell my sister that I love her, and he signed his name.


This is a man who had gone to thousands of fires, and never wrote notes before. I try to recreate in my mind what he did. He drove across the Brooklyn Bridge, and to drive across the Brooklyn Bridge on the morning of September 11, at about the time he was doing it, you had to feel that you were driving into hell. That's what you saw, you saw an inferno unlike anything I could possibly describe to you, or any documentary could ever show you.

Well, he had every reason not to go. He was injured, he had been told not to report for duty, nobody could have ever criticized him if he didn't go, no one could have ever held it against him, but he drove there. He went into the building, and he saved people twice, and then he entered the first building right before it collapsed, and he died.

But just think of the courage that he had. Not a lack of fear. When you think of courage, don't think of a lack of fear. Courage is about being afraid, but being able to do what you have to do anyway. Courage is about seeing those flames, knowing the fear, knowing you're going into the worst fire you'd ever face in your entire life, and knowing you may never return.

But it's also understanding that you're a firefighter, that you're a big strong man like he is, that you can carry people down. Maybe I can't do that, maybe you can't do that, but he could do that that's what his life was about, that's what he swore to do, that's what gave him a sense of self-respect and self-esteem.

That's what courage is about, it's about managing your fears. Please remember that. You're going to have to do it all your life. I have to do it, you have to do it. If you want to succeed, if you want to be happy, if you want to lead, you have to manage your fears. And don't ever think it's about the lack of fear. It's about managing your fears.

When I think about firefighters and police officers, I think about the ones that I used to give awards to for bravery, for taking people out of the East River or climbing up to buildings and taking them down. Every once in a while, when I would give them the award, they would come up to the podium to speak, and they would become very nervous. Their hands would shake, and they would be unable to speak or answer questions. They were afraid. And it never ceased to amaze me, how could this man who just jumped into the East River and taken out a ten-year-old child and saved their lives, and put their life at risk, how come he's afraid to speak?

I realized he hadn't learned how to manage that fear. He wasn't expected to speak, he didn't take an oath to speak. That wasn't his obligation, that wasn't his duty. If you had that man do it three or four more times and he would have done it as well or better than any of us, because he would have learned to have managed his fears to do what you have to do. That's the story of the one firefighter that I mentioned, the 342 others that lost their lives at the World Trade Center, the numerous police officers and rescue workers.

And it wasn't just the firefighters and police officers and rescue workers who had this courage. There was a 70-year-old man whose family I met. He was on the floor that was hit, and he let people go down in the elevator, and they wanted him to come on the elevator. And he said, No, and he kept pushing people on the elevator and he said, I'm 70 years old, I've lived my life. You're younger, you need to still live your life. He said that to eight or ten people. He sent them all down on an elevator, and there wasn't enough time for an elevator to come get him. This was also a man who knew how to manage his fear, knew how to be courageous. So please, when you think about what happened at the World Trade Center and the terrible attack and the viciousness and the evilness of it, the stories of bravery and courage overwhelm it enormously.

Remember, if you want to succeed in life, there are two things you need. You need a belief, and you need courage. You need to know what you believe in, you need to believe in it strongly, like the firefighter did, or like the man who let the elevator go, who understood the importance of human life, who understood the importance of helping give other people the chance to live. Then you have to have the courage to act on those beliefs. If you have both of those things, you're going to succeed.

You've been extremely well trained. You're very fortunate young men and women in some cases, not so young. People graduate at all different ages now. But in any case, you have tremendous advantages. Please consider that you've got to give something back in the future. Respect the idea of public service. And when you see our men and women in uniform, our police, our fire, our military, they are actually something a little bit more special. What they do for a living is to put their lives at risk, so that you can be safe in your office, you can be safe at home, you can be safe here in this building.

I thank you very much for the opportunity to be your commencement speaker. I am more than willing to conclude with the following chant, but before I say Go Orange, which I will conclude with, Go Yankees! But I will say Go Orange! Thank you.